More than a 150,000 homes and businesses were still in the dark Tuesday night, more than 24 hours after ferocious storms pummeled much of the Eastern US – leaving two people dead, homes without roofs and drivers stranded for hours.
A 28-year-old man died Monday after he was struck by lightning in a parking lot in Florence, Alabama, police said
Authorities have not identified him.
In South Carolina, 15-year-old Evan Christopher Kinley was killed when a falling tree struck him outside his grandparents’ home in Anderson County, the county coroner’s office said.
In Westminster, Maryland, dozens of people were trapped in cars for up to five and a half-hours Monday after severe weather toppled power lines onto the vehicles on Route 140, state police said.
Is this extreme weather the 'new normal?' There's no such thing, some scientists say
Drivers waited for hours while crews worked to de-energize the power lines to get them out.
Jeffrey Campbell was on his way home from work when a utility pole came down on vehicles in front of him, trapping him for hours with live wires on the ground on either side of his truck, he said
The wire to his right took out his exterior mirror, he said.
“It’s just poles coming down one after the other,” he said.
Eventually, 33 adults and 14 children were rescued
No injuries were reported, police said.
The storms that hammered Philadelphia all the way down to Atlanta on Monday may be long gone, but millions of people remained at risk for severe weather, including thunderstorms, across the Plains Tuesday night.
Very large hail, strong winds and tornadoes are possible in parts of the central High Plains.
Earlier Tuesday, eastern Massachusetts, including Boston was deluged with intense rain, with 1 to 3 inches, falling in just a few hours
Some storms in the area turned severe, producing damaging wind gusts and at least one tornado, the National Weather Service office in Boston confirmed Tuesday.
The fierce storms Monday left neighborhoods littered with debris and hundreds of thousands of people in the dark.
As of Tuesday night, more than 150,000 homes and businesses remained without power across Eastern states but the majority of outages were confined to Pennsylvania, Georgia and Maryland, according to PowerOutage.us
A day earlier, more than 1 million customers were without power as a result of damaging storms.
In extreme heat, here are 14 ways to keep your body and home cool without AC
In Knoxville, Tennessee, the storms tore the roofs off homes, aerial footage from CNN affiliate WVLT showed.
And large, dangerous hail pummeled parts of Virginia
In Caroline County, hail the size of a grapefruit (4.75 inches) was reported, the Storm Prediction Center said
That’s the largest hail reported in the state of Virginia since 2002, according to the National Weather Service in Wakefield, Virginia.
The storms also disrupted travel Monday
More than 8,600 flights within, into or out of the US were delayed Monday and more than 1,700 were canceled, according to FlightAware.com
As of Tuesday afternoon, more than 300 flights had been canceled and more than 2,900 delayed.
Brutal storms also hit the Midwest on Monday, including Indiana – where EF-1 tornado damage was found in Dubois and Orange counties, the National Weather Service office in nearby Louisville said.
It’s not clear whether the damage was caused by one longer tornado or multiple tornadoes, the weather service said.
In Paoli, Indiana, vicious winds Monday ripped the roofs off buildings, gnarled traffic signs and hurled debris across streets, aerial video from CNN affiliate WLKY showed.
It could take several days to restore power in Paoli, officials said.
The violent weather “pretty much tore up this little town,” Jason Terrell told CNN affiliate WDRB
Terrell’s truck was smashed by several trees.
“Just a lot of heartbreak for local Paoli,” he said.
CNN’s Mary Gilbert, Roxanne Garcia, Amanda Jackson, Jamiel Lynch and Taylor Ward contributed to this report.
© 2023 Cable News Network
A Warner Bros
Discovery Company
All Rights Reserved
 CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
