As the planet’s hottest month on record comes to a close, 70 million people are under heat alerts in the US, where areas in the southern plains and Southeast could see record-setting highs of 115 degrees or more.
While the Northeast and mid-Atlantic will get some relief Sunday, heat advisories and excessive heat warnings are widespread across more than 10 states, from Texas to Florida, according to the National Weather Service
The weather service warned heat indexes, which factor in humidity, could soar above 105 to 115 degrees across the southern Plains to the lower Mississippi Valley and the Southeast.
Relief from heat wave is on the way for Northeast and mid-Atlantic, but southern areas remain at risk
“Record hot highs and warm minimum temperatures are widely possible in these regions next week,” the prediction center added.
The Southwest gets some reprieve from the record-setting heat as high temperatures, though still extremely hot, return to more normal values for this time of year.
Phoenix topped 110 degrees for the 30th day in a row on Saturday, hitting a high of 115 degrees
It is a record-setting 17 days of 115 degree-plus temperatures for Phoenix this year, surpassing the previous record of 14 days set in 2020, according to the weather service
The streak will likely end Monday, when temperatures are expected to fall below the 110-degree mark after rain showers move through the area.
Even some cactuses couldn’t take the heat in Phoenix, where the plants were seen collapsing and dehydrated animals were rushed to a rehabilitation center.
The recent heat wave proved deadly in some areas.
A 53-year-old woman in Illinois died Thursday in her apartment, where she didn’t have air conditioning because her power had been disconnected, according to the Peoria County coroner’s office
In Texas, a 66-year-old woman died early Tuesday from the extreme heat after being taken to a hospital from her apartment in North Richland Hills, police said.
This month is the planet's hottest on record by far -- and hottest in around 120,000 years, scientists say
Heat-related hospitalizations are also up
In Arizona, doctors are seeing an increase of patients with burns just from falling on the hot ground.
Scientists said July will be the planet’s hottest month on record and human-induced climate change is the main factor leading to the high temperatures.
To prevent heat-related illness, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advises finding cool, indoor areas to stay, drinking plenty of fluids and regularly checking on vulnerable people, like young children and the elderly.
CNN’s Aya Elamroussi contributed to this report.
© 2023 Cable News Network
A Warner Bros
Discovery Company
All Rights Reserved
 CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
