Live
Israel at war with Hamas
Live
House speaker race
By Tara Subramaniam, Andrew Raine, Thom Poole, Joshua Berlinger, Maureen Chowdhury, Matt Meyer and Jessie Yeung, CNN
Our live coverage of the conflict in Israel and Gaza has moved here.
From CNN’s Eyad Kourdi
Islamist militant group Hamas on Sunday accused the United States of taking part in "aggression against Palestinian people" by sending a Navy carrier strike group to the eastern Mediterranean Sea.
The Navy carrier strike group includes the USS Gerald R
Ford, a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, accompanied by guided missile destroyers and guided missile cruisers.
The US is also positioning more fighter jets to the Middle East, as a deterrent to Hezbollah in Lebanon and other militant groups aligned against Israel, officials say.
From CNN’s Sugam Pokharel
At least 10 Nepali citizens were killed when Hamas militants attacked southern Israel on Saturday, Nepal's ambassador to Israel told CNN on Sunday.
The deceased were agriculture students in the Alumim kibbutz, Ambassador Kanta Rizal said.
One Nepali student remains missing, Rizal added.
Officials say the death toll in Israel has passed 700 following Hamas' unprecedented surprise attack that began on Saturday
More than 400 Palestinians have died in the Israeli military response, according to the health ministry in Gaza.
From CNN's Stefano Pozzebon and Mia Alberti
The Israeli embassy in Bogota has been vandalized with graffiti including swastikas, Israel's envoy to Colombia said on Sunday.
Photos posted by Ambassador Gali Dagan on X, formerly Twitter, show a pillar of the embassy building daubed with a swastika next to the Star of David and pro-Palestinian slogans.
The incident comes after Colombian President Gustavo Petro expressed support for the recognition of Palestine on Saturday, slamming the international community for treating the "Israeli occupation in Palestine" in a "very different way" from the Russia-Ukraine conflict.
CNN has reached out to Bogota police for more details about the incident.
From CNN’s Artemis Moshtaghian
A professor emeritus from Brandies University in Massachusetts said his daughter and son-in-law were killed in the Hamas attacks on Israel on Saturday.
Ilan Troen told NPR that his daughter and son-in-law tried to shield their son from gunfire as militants attacked.
It is unclear whether Troen’s daughter and son-in-law, whose names have not been released, were US citizens.
From CNN’s Hadas Gold in Jerusalem
Israel has "severely degraded the capabilities" of Palestinian militant group Hamas as airstrikes on Gaza continued into early Monday, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said.
The IDF said it targeted a structure that housed Hamas operatives and several of the group's operational command centers, including a three-floor command center.
The IDF also said it targeted:
Israel has been pounding Gaza with airstrikes and formally declared war on Hamas Sunday following an unprecedented surprise attack by the militant group that began on Saturday
More than 400 Palestinians have died, according to the health ministry in Gaza, and medical care has been complicated by Israel cutting power to the territory.
Officials say the death toll in Israel has passed 700.
From CNN's Alex Marquardt, Jeremy Herb, Lauren Fox, Zachary Cohen
US lawmakers and Biden administration officials discussed increasing support for Israel at a briefing with House leadership on Sunday night, three people familiar with the call told CNN.
Senior officials from the State and Defense Departments told the lawmakers they are moving as quickly as they can to deliver weapons and resources to Israel as part of already existing contracts, the sources said.
That could help ensure that Washington provides some items as soon as possible, amid questions about how quickly Congress could act on a larger aid package.
From CNN's Homero De la Fuente and Tara Subramaniam
The Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) has postponed all upcoming matches scheduled in Israel due to the ongoing conflict, European soccer's governing body said Sunday.
The matches affected include Thursday’s Euro 2024 qualifier between Israel and Switzerland, as well as Israel’s Euro Under-21 championship matches against Estonia and Germany.
Read more here.
From CNN staff
The death toll is rising in Israel and Gaza as fighting rages between Israeli forces and Hamas militants and as more details emerge of the dead and those taken hostage.
Israel formally declared war on Hamas on Sunday after the Islamist militant group launched its deadly surprise assault on Saturday
Israel also cut power to Gaza — complicating medical care efforts as the densely-populated territory is pounded by Israeli airstrikes.
If you're just joining us, here's what you need to know:
Please enable JavaScript for a better experience.
