Every student of biology, anatomy, anthropology, ethnology or psychology is familiar with these facts.
Visible from space, the Great Barrier Reef is the largest structure on Earth made by living organisms.
When you watch television or listen to the radio, the music which you hear is often African in origin.
You say I should know him quite well, but as a matter of fact, I was introduced to him only last week.
You should make sure that you get there on time. Tom won't wait more than ten minutes if you are late.
After the hatchet job my boss did on my proposal, I'm not sure how long I want to keep on working here.
Another interesting source of energy is the heat that can be recovered from radioactive waste material.
Disconnect the power cable from the modem, wait for approximately one minute, then reconnect the cable.
Disconnect the power cable from the modem, wait for approximately one minute, then reconnect the cable.
I never see a library without wishing I had time to go there and stay till I had read everything in it.
Next time I switch jobs, I need work that will let me make use of the experience I've gained up to now.
The body and the mind of man are so closely bound together that whatever affects one affects the other.
When I visited my hometown this summer, I found the city different from what it had been ten years ago.
Between meals, he usually manages to stow away a generous supply of candy, ice cream, popcorn and fruit.
Poverty does more to bring out the worst in people and conceal the best than anything else in the world.
Some people think that it is difficult for a native speaker of English to learn Chinese, but I disagree.
The world's greatest singers and most of its famous musicians have been fat or at least decidedly plump.
Tom thinks he knows how much money Mary makes, but Mary makes quite a bit more than Tom thinks she does.
When I got out of prison, I couldn't find a job anywhere near my home since no one would hire an ex-con.
A lot of people would like to become famous. However, a lot of famous people wish they weren't so famous.
During hard times, people might not go on a trip, but they might be willing to pay extra for good coffee.
Her sewing basket, dresser drawers and pantry shelves are all systematically arranged in apple-pie order.
I'd love to be a fly on the wall at the meeting of the senior executives about the future of the company.
My friend likes to live in the city, but his wife prefers to live in their little cottage in the country.
Since there are rice paddies near my house, I often hear frogs croaking all night long this time of year.
Some superstitious people in America believe that if a black cat crosses your path, you'll have bad luck.
Thomas A. Edison so loves his work that he sleeps an average of less than four hours of each twenty-four.
What's important isn't which university you've graduated from, but what you learned while you were there.
It's a lot of trouble to write my name, because it takes 50 strokes to write both my first and last names.
Last year, I spent so much time by myself that I almost forgot how to communicate effectively with others.
Nothing will determine our success as a nation in the 21st century more than how well we educate our kids.
Tom wondered if Mary would think that eight in the morning was too early for him to open a bottle of wine.
We can argue about how to best achieve these goals, but we can't be complacent about the goals themselves.
We still have more than halfway to go to get to the top of the mountain. Are you really already exhausted?
We still have more than halfway to go to get to the top of the mountain. Are you really already exhausted?
We still have more than halfway to go to get to the top of the mountain. Are you really already exhausted?
We still have more than halfway to go to get to the top of the mountain. Are you really already exhausted?
When I woke up today, I yawned, stretched, rubbed the sleep out of my eyes, and put on a pair of slippers.
Cats are like girls. If they talk to you it's great, but if you try to talk to them, it doesn't go so well.
He got tired of being the devil's advocate and now agrees with every idea they suggest, no matter how dumb.
Incidentally, this room doesn't have anything like an air conditioner. All it has is a hand-held paper fan.
Providing energy to the poor without destroying the planet any further is this century's biggest challenge.
We're gonna make sure that no one is taking advantage of the American people for their own short-term gain.
Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for the rest of his life.
Tom is respected in the business community because he is always fair and square in his dealings with others.
Tom told me that Mary was good at playing the piano, but I didn't really believe him until I heard her play.
We can't leave our tents on the beach where they are now. If we do, they'll be under water during high tide.
I know it's kind of late, but would you mind if I came over now? I have something I need to discuss with you.
I know it's kind of late, but would you mind if I came over now? I have something I need to discuss with you.
If you are a parent, don't allow yourself to set your heart on any particular line of work for your children.
If you had to go live on a deserted island and could only take one book with you, which one would you choose?
If you want this marriage to work, you need to choose between spending time with me and working all the time.
The best thing about working in a team is that, when something goes wrong, you can always blame someone else.
A person will have the face of an angel when borrowing something, but the face of the devil when returning it.
I can't believe that you aren't at least willing to consider the possibility that there's another explanation.
I can't believe that you aren't at least willing to consider the possibility that there's another explanation.
I can't believe that you aren't at least willing to consider the possibility that there's another explanation.
I can't believe that you aren't at least willing to consider the possibility that there's another explanation.
I can't believe that you aren't at least willing to consider the possibility that there's another explanation.
I can't believe that you aren't at least willing to consider the possibility that there's another explanation.
I honestly think it's better to be a failure at something you love than to be a success at something you hate.
President Barack Obama praised Poland as an example for aspiring democracies in the Middle East and elsewhere.
From the moment he arrived there, he kept on bothering his doctor to tell him when he would be able to go home.
I realize I may not be the most desirable man in the world, but I still hope you'll consider going out with me.
I realize I may not be the most desirable man in the world, but I still hope you'll consider going out with me.
People often lie about what they did on the weekend, so their friends won't realize how boring they really are.
The police suspected there was a connection between the abandoned car and the dead body found three miles away.
The questions came fast and furious from the large number of reporters who had gathered outside the courthouse.
A few people mentioned they would like to attend some sessions later in the day on the Technical Session Agenda.
Consider the successes that have been achieved by tired, discouraged people who decided to give it one more try.
Consider the successes that have been achieved by tired, discouraged people who decided to give it one more try.
I know that it is highly unlikely that you'd ever want to go out with me, but I still need to ask at least once.
The man who makes but one mistake a year because he makes but two decisions is wrong fifty per cent of the time.
I know you're upset about your car being totaled, but you weren't injured and you should be thankful to be alive.
I sometimes wish I could live a quiet retired sort of life but I doubt I could stand it for more than a few days.
Did you know that in Japan, if you have a tattoo, you won't be allowed to bathe in many of the hot spring resorts?
He is inclined to look at everything from the standpoint of its practicality and is neither stingy nor extravagant.
Someone told me that Albert Einstein said, "Common sense is the collection of prejudices acquired by age eighteen."
Every time I make a mistake, I learn something. The challenge is not to keep making the same mistakes over and over.
Getting your message across is much more important than trying to say it exactly like a native speaker would say it.
I felt bad, so I was admitted into the hospital. However, it turned out that there was nothing really wrong with me.
Not long ago we heard a father say in the presence of his large family, "I don't want any of my boys to be lawyers."
Notice the hands of the people you meet and you will be surprised to see how different and how interesting they are.
Over 100 tons of dust and sand-sized particles bombard the earth every day from space, most of which goes unnoticed.
The police drew an outline of a body at the scene of the crime to indicate how the body was lying when it was found.
This is a time of year when people get together with family and friends to observe Passover and to celebrate Easter.
A man touched down on the moon. A wall came down in Berlin. A world was connected by our own science and imagination.
Charles Moore created Forth in an attempt to increase programmer productivity without sacrificing machine efficiency.
Every student who has graduated from our university has studied English with a native speaker for at least two years.
If you don't want to put on sunscreen, that's your problem. Just don't come complaining to me when you get a sunburn.
Nobody has asked you to agree, but can't you at least accept that there are people who hold different views from you?
Nobody has asked you to agree, but can't you at least accept that there are people who hold different views from you?
The people crowded round the injured man, but they made way for the doctor when he reached the scene of the accident.
A chance to do as we please, especially to do as little hard work as possible, is a secret desire of almost everybody.
Even though computer programmers may use semicolons every day, nowadays most people only use semicolons for emoticons.
I had never eaten any kind of Thai food, so I was pretty excited about going to a Thai restaurant with my grandmother.
Since I've been on this diet, my weight is down, my cholesterol is down and my sleep apnea has completely disappeared.
"When does your sister come back from work?" "I don't know, but I think she'll arrive at home a few minutes before me."
Never choose a vocation just because your friends are in it, nor refuse another just because your worst enemy is in it.
When we hear of a divorce we assume that it was caused by the inability of those two people to agree upon fundamentals.
A friend I went with on our first trip abroad had his wallet pickpocketed. I don't think it left a very good impression.
Even now, I occasionally think I'd like to see you. Not the you that you are today, but the you I remember from the past.
Police are urging people not to pick up hitchhikers as they search for two prisoners on the run after escaping from jail.
We should spend our time creating content for our website rather than wasting time worrying about minor cosmetic details.
A lot of people who have up until now been spending money having a good time now need to be more careful with their money.
For the crime of first degree murder, this court hereby sentences you to life in prison without the possibility of parole.
It's very easy to sound natural in your own native language, and very easy to sound unnatural in your non-native language.
The difference between the right word and almost the right word is the difference between lightning and the lightning bug.
The difference between the right word and almost the right word is the difference between lightning and the lightning bug.
If you don't eat breakfast, you'll probably be hungry during the morning and won't be as efficient at work as you could be.
If you don't eat breakfast, you'll probably be hungry during the morning and won't be as efficient at work as you could be.
I used to watch this anime a lot when I was a kid, but I can't quite remember what happened to the hero in the final episode.
The English language is undoubtedly the easiest and at the same time the most efficient means of international communication.
According to the contract you may take three days of bereavement leave for your uncle's funeral, but only one for your nephew's.
According to the contract you may take three days of bereavement leave for your uncle's funeral, but only one for your nephew's.
According to the contract you may take three days of bereavement leave for your uncle's funeral, but only one for your nephew's.
Food prices are at their highest level since the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization began keeping records in 1990.
If one has the right to live, then one should also have the right to die. If not, then living is not a right, but an obligation.
It was bad enough that he usually came to work late, but coming in drunk was the last straw, and I'm going to have to let him go.
The teacher supervising the playground became concerned when she saw a man talking to some of the children over the school fence.
Cities and provinces along the Yangtze River in central China are grappling with the country's worst drought in more than 50 years.
That proposal may be a way to kill two birds with one stone, but we also have to be careful not to get greedy and spoil everything.
A committee is a group of people who individually can do nothing, but who, as a group, can meet and decide that nothing can be done.
One of the best ways to help us is to translate from a foreign language you know into your own native language or strongest language.
Since it will be cold soon, it might be nice to enjoy doing something outdoors the final few warm days we have before winter sets in.
A man who has never gone to school may steal from a freight car, but if he has a university education, he may steal the whole railroad.
One way to lower the number of errors in the Tatoeba Corpus would be to encourage people to only translate into their native languages.
What is old age? First you forget names, then you forget faces, then you forget to pull your zipper up, then you forget to pull it down.
What is old age? First you forget names, then you forget faces, then you forget to pull your zipper up, then you forget to pull it down.
He and I have a near-telepathic understanding of each other. No sooner does one of us say something than the other is already responding.
Although rainforests make up only two percent of the earth's surface, over half the world's wild plant, animal and insect species live there.
If you translate from your second language into your own native language, rather than the other way around, you're less likely to make mistakes.
I love trying out new things, so I always buy products as soon as they hit the store shelves. Of course, half the time I end up wishing I hadn't.
A good theory is characterized by the fact that it makes a number of predictions that could in principle be disproved or falsified by observation.
The more time you spend speaking a foreign language, the better you get at guessing what non-native speakers are trying to say in your own language.
The enquiry concluded that, despite his denials, the chief executive would have had to have known about the illegal practices occurring in the company.
You may not learn to speak as well as a native speaker, but you should be able to speak well enough that native speakers will understand what you have to say.
And the good news is that today the economy is growing again. Wages, incomes, home values and retirement accounts are all rising again. Poverty is falling again.
E-cigarettes are being promoted as a healthy alternative to tobacco cigarettes, but health authorities are concerned about the long-term health effects on users.
It's still too hard to find a job. And even if you have a job, chances are you're having a tougher time paying the rising costs of everything from groceries to gas.
Even at the end of the nineteenth century, sailors in the British Navy were not permitted to use knives and forks because using them was considered a sign of weakness.
Five tremors in excess of magnitude 5.0 on the Richter scale have shaken Japan just this week, but scientists are warning that the largest expected aftershock has yet to hit.
No matter how much you try to convince people that chocolate is vanilla, it'll still be chocolate, even though you may manage to convince yourself and a few others that it's vanilla.
We need to uphold laws against discrimination — in hiring, and in housing, and in education, and in the criminal justice system. That is what our Constitution and highest ideals require.
A child who is a native speaker usually knows many things about his or her language that a non-native speaker who has been studying for years still does not know and perhaps will never know.
There are four main causes of alcohol-related death. Injury from car accidents or violence is one. Diseases like cirrhosis of the liver, cancer, heart and blood system diseases are the others.
"Top-down economics never works," said Obama. "The country does not succeed when just those at the very top are doing well. We succeed when the middle class gets bigger, when it feels greater security."
A carbon footprint is the amount of carbon dioxide pollution that we produce as a result of our activities. Some people try to reduce their carbon footprint because they are concerned about climate change.
Death is something that we're often discouraged to talk about or even think about, but I've realized that preparing for death is one of the most empowering things you can do. Thinking about death clarifies your life.
Since there are usually multiple websites on any given topic, I usually just click the back button when I arrive on any webpage that has pop-up advertising. I just go to the next page found by Google and hope for something less irritating.
If someone who doesn't know your background says that you sound like a native speaker, it means they probably noticed something about your speaking that made them realize you weren't a native speaker. In other words, you don't really sound like a native speaker.