Whether you’re gearing up for the next season of HBO’s “House of the Dragon” prequel, waiting desperately for George R.R
Martin to publish the next “A Song of Ice and Fire” installment or rewatching the original series just to feel the pain all over again, you can never know too much about “Game of Thrones.”
Well, maybe you can
A little refresher on the history can’t hurt, though.
The drama, patricide, incest, betrayal, nudity and draconology of the “Game of Thrones” books and TV series spans more than 12,000 years
No, don’t think too hard about what “years” are in the fantasy realm of Westeros
Be thankful there’s a point of reference at all, because it’s about to get complex
(HBO shares parent company Warner Bros
Discovery with CNN.)
How the date system works:
The ‘Star Wars’ timeline is confusing
Here’s when ‘The Mandalorian,’ ‘Ahsoka’ and more take place
“A Song of Ice and Fire” time is split into two eras: BC and AC, or “Before Conquest” and “After Conquest.” The conquest in question here is Aegon’s Conquest, or the moment when the famed Targaryen family, they of the platinum hair and big dragons, become a major player in Westeros, the fictional, Anglo-inspired realm where most of the “Game of Thrones” action takes place.
Pretty much everything that happens in the “Game of Thrones” and “House of the Dragon” series takes place in the AC era, so we’ll stick to that
All kinds of important lore happens before this era, and the histories in the show and the books are so thick that there are inevitably some little in-world discrepancies
Just use this timeline as a general guide, okay? There is only so much time one can devote to fantastical history before it becomes madness.
The Targaryens (the ancestors of Daenerys, Jon Snow, and practically everyone on “House of the Dragon”) invade Westeros and become its ruling family, setting up the capital city of King’s Landing
(That’s where the Baratheons and Lannisters ruled from for nearly the whole “Game of Thrones” series.) 112 AC: “House of the Dragon,” Season 1
This is where “House of the Dragon” Season 1 leaves off
The Dance of the Dragons is the name for a civil war between factions of House Targaryen over who their rightful ruler should be
It is a big part of Westerosi history and is set to be the main action in “House of the Dragon” Season 2
No spoilers, but a lot of people die.
We still haven’t gotten to the main “Game of Thrones” action, but more than a Westerosi century after the bloody Dance of the Dragons, Targaryens are still in power, major GoT players are being born and events that influence the whole series start to play out
Aerys II was the “Mad King” who was eventually slain by Jaime Lannister, and marked the end of the unbroken centuries during which Targaryens ruled Westeros.
Another crucial moment in Westerosi history, this is when Robert Baratheon wrests power from the Targaryens
Also around this time, Rhaegar Targaryen (Daenerys’ brother) secretly marries Lyanna Stark, who gives birth to Jon Snow and then dies (RIP again), setting up one of the biggest and ickiest secrets of the series.
Finally, 186 years after “House of the Dragon” Season 1 begins, we get to the main action.
From here on out, each year roughly corresponds to a season of the show
Funny how these things happen!
299 AC: “Game of Thrones” Season 2 (“ASOIAF Book 2: “A Clash of Kings”)
301 AC: “Game of Thrones” Season 4 (“ASOIAF” Book 3: “A Storm of Swords”)
No, that is not a typo
Starting this season, the timing of the show starts to pull away significantly from the timing of the books
Some events from different books overlap in the same season, and some events in the same book are more spread out
Take it up with George R.R
Martin.
The action of this season supposedly aligns with the sixth “ASOIAF” book, “The Winds of Winter.” Hard to tell, since we are still waiting for its release.
© 2023 Cable News Network
A Warner Bros
Discovery Company
All Rights Reserved
 CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
