Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
An ExxonMobil executive who heads up the business unit that’s involved in a potential $60 billion mega-merger with Pioneer Natural Resources was arrested late last week in Texas for allegedly committing sexual assault.
David Scott, senior vice president of ExxonMobil Upstream, was arrested at 9:24 am CT on Thursday at the La Quinta Inn & Suites hotel in Magnolia, Texas, on a sexual assault charge, according to Montgomery County, Texas, jail records. Scott, 49, is being held on a $30,000 bond, according to the Montgomery County Sheriff’s Office.
Sheriff’s deputies dispatched to the La Quinta Inn last Thursday spoke with a woman who said she was sexually assaulted by a man in one of the hotel rooms, according to a sheriff’s office statement provided Monday to CNN. Deputies interviewed Scott, 49, and subsequently arrested him for sexual assault, a second degree felony that could carry a sentence of two to 20 years in prison and a fine up to $10,000.
ExxonMobil’s (XOM) headquarters are located about 17 miles southwest of the hotel.
“All ExxonMobil employees, officers and directors are accountable for observing the highest standards of integrity and code of conduct in support of the company’s business and otherwise,” an Exxon spokesperson said in statement emailed to CNN. “We are aware of the allegations and cannot comment on a personal matter; however, we can say that this individual will not continue work responsibilities as the investigation proceeds.”
Exxon is in discussions to buy US shale giant and rival Pioneer Natural Resources in a deal reportedly valued near $60 billion, according to the Wall Street Journal. Exxon declined to comment to CNN on the potential deal, saying it does not issue statements on “market rumors.”
It was not immediately known what involvement Scott had in those reported negotiations.
This story is developing and will be updated.
CNN’s Ashley Killough, Kate Trafecante and Chris Boyette contributed to this report
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.