Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Americans celebrate Indigenous Peoples’ Day and Columbus Day on the second Monday of October each year.
Indigenous Peoples’ Day recognizes the contributions and legacy of those who lived here long before Christopher Columbus erroneously claimed to have discovered America. President Joe Biden formally recognized Indigenous Peoples’ Day in 2021 by signing a proclamation stating that federal policies “systematically sought to assimilate and displace Native people and eradicate Native cultures.”
Some states officially celebrate Indigenous Peoples’ Day and others commemorate it through proclamations. More than 100 cities have replaced Columbus Day altogether with the holiday.
While many will be off from school or office jobs and enjoying the long weekend, some may be wondering what’s open and closed.
Monday is a Federal Reserve bank holiday. However, markets will be open – Nasdaq and the New York Stock Exchange will be trading.
Out of the major US Banks, Bank of America, Wells Fargo and Citibank branches will be closed.
Chase Bank and TD Bank will be open for Indigenous Peoples’ Day.
As always, you can utilize online banking or ATM services.
The United States Postal Service will be closed and won’t deliver mail or packages.
However, if you need to get mail out, UPS and FedEx will mostly be operating as usual. FedEx Express and FedEx Ground Economy will have modified service. UPS will fully function as normal.
Most big box retailers, such as Target, Walmart and Kroger, will be open. Make sure to check with local businesses for their operating hours.
Since it’s a government holiday, government buildings will be closed – think the DMV, libraries, courts and offices.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
