Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
The average US mortgage rate hit 7.49% this week, the highest level in 23 years. But the rate you may be able to secure from a lender could be very different. It could either be a good bit higher than the current average, or lower. It all depends on the financial attributes and risks that you present lenders as a borrower.
While average rates in the 2%-3% range that homebuyers secured over the past few years are not coming back any time soon, mortgage rates also aren’t expected to rival the sky-high rates of the 1980s, which surged to almost 19% amid inflation.
But your rate may vary from the published average weekly rates.
Here’s what goes into determining it.
Your mortgage rate is based on a calculation the lender makes on how likely you are, as a borrower, to pay them back. It’s an approach called “risk-based pricing” that determines how much you’ll have to pay the lender for the loan.
The lower risk you present, the lower your mortgage rate will be.
Among some fairly well-known positive attributes:
This is one of the biggest determinants to lowering your mortgage rate. Borrowers who are able pay 20% of a mortgage — also known as a mortgage with a loan-to-value of 80% —  are considered to be lower-risk borrowers because they immediately have more skin in the game.
Borrowers whose down payment is less than 20% are likely to pay a higher rate.
More remote workers are willing to move in order to find affordable housing
The applications examined by Freddie Mac to determine its average weekly mortgage rate are limited to conforming loans with a 20% down payment, so they are automatically going to be lower rates than a wider population of borrowers who put down less.
Between July 2021 and June 2022, the typical down payment for a first-time homebuyer was 6%, according to the National Association of Realtors. The typical down payment for a repeat buyer, likely using equity from a home sold, was higher, at 17%.
If any of the other measures mentioned above are deemed to be weak, the mortgage applicant can expect to pay a higher rate.
Also, as borrowers move down in FICO scores, those considered “sub-prime” by the industry — often due to having limited (or no) credit history — are viewed as more risky and can expect to be charged a higher mortgage rate if they are approved to borrow at all.
A recent analysis of mortgages from 2022 showed that mortgage application denials increased over the past year, largely because of insufficient income.
Younger buyers may have too short of an employment history, or work history that is too uneven, to qualify for lower rates.
You don’t have to settle for the first offer you receive. If you think you can do better, shop around and get quotes from a variety of lenders like a bank, a credit union or an online lender.
Another way people who are quoted a certain mortgage rate can lower it is by buying down the rate with discount points. This is akin to prepaying your interest.
Home affordability is the worst it has been since 1984
Typically, each point is equal to 1% of the borrower’s mortgage cost. Paying 1 point brings the rate down by about 0.25%. A borrower with a $400,000 loan can buy down a 7.5% mortgage rate to 7.25% for $4,000.
By reducing the mortgage rate upfront, the monthly costs will be smaller for the life of the loan.
Also, while it doesn’t necessarily reduce your interest rate, putting more money down will reduce the overall size of your loan and that can reduce your monthly payments.
Among the attributes that a lender is prohibited from taking into consideration to determine a borrower’s risk are race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age and any other category that is protected by the Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
The law also prohibits creditors from discriminating against credit applicants who’ve received income from a public assistance program, or because an applicant has exercised any right under the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
Beyond that, there are some added protections for consumers that are intended to provide transparency about a lender’s credit decisions, due to the 2011 Fair Credit Reporting Act.
Homeowners are tapping into their home equity to get cash
According to the law, the Risk-Based Pricing Rule requires lenders to notify consumers if they are getting worse terms based on information in their credit report. Companies and lenders do this in various ways. Many provide disclosures to all customers that decisions based on a person’s credit report impact the terms and rate offered.
In addition, if a lender denies a loan application based on information in a consumer report, the lender must provide an “adverse action” notice to the consumer to explain the reason for the denial.
A borrower can then know what area of their financial profile that needs improvement, so they might be approved the next time.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
