John Richard "Ducky" Schofield (born January 7, 1935), is an American former professional baseball infielder. He played 19 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1953 to 1971 for the St. Louis Cardinals, Pittsburgh Pirates, San Francisco Giants, New York Yankees, Los Angeles Dodgers, Boston Red Sox, and Milwaukee Brewers.
Schofield made his Major League Baseball debut shortly after graduating from Springfield High School with the St. Louis Cardinals on July 3, 1953, and appeared in his final game on September 30, 1971 for the Milwaukee Brewers. Ducky was a member of the 1960 World Champion Pittsburgh Pirates and played a pivotal role in the team's N.L. pennant. It appeared the Pirates had suffered a huge loss on September 6, 1960 when team captain Dick Groat, who would subsequently be honored as both the National League's batting champion and most valuable player, suffered a broken wrist. Schofield took over as the Pirates' shortstop and batted .403 through the end of the season to help the Pirates clinch the N.L. pennant. He also hit .333 in the World Series (1 hit in 3 at-bats) after Groat returned. Schofield was also the first player to bat at Shea Stadium in 1964, with the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Schofield is the father of daughters Kim Schofield Werth, who competed in the U.S. Olympic Trials in the long jump and 100 meters, and Tami (1960-2021); and son, former Major League Baseball player Dick Schofield and the grandfather of former MLB outfielder Jayson Werth. Ducky, Dick, and Jayson all played for the Los Angeles Dodgers at one point in their respective careers. Ducky was also known as Dick Schofield, going by his middle name. His son's first name is Richard, so is technically not a "Junior".
Schofield resides in Springfield, Illinois where he is currently an elected official, serving on the Springfield Metropolitan Exposition and Auditorium Authority. His wife, Donna (Dabney) Schofield, died November 8, 2012. The couple had been married for 56 years.
Third-generation Major League Baseball familiesCareer statistics and player information from Baseball Reference, or Fangraphs, or Baseball Reference (Minors)
Springfield Metropolitan Exposition and Auditorium Authority (SMEAA) Board Members. Sangamon County, Illinois – Elected Officials.
