Gautam Swami was the Ganadhara (chief disciple) of Mahavira, the 24th and last Jain Tirthankara of present half cycle of time. He is also referred to as Indrabhuti Gautam, Guru Gautam, Gautam Swami Ganadhara and Gautam Swami.
Gautama was the senior-most of 11 ganadharas (chief disciples) of Mahavira. He had two brothers Agnibhuti and Vayubhuti who also became ganadhara of Mahavira. Other ganadhara were Vyakta, Sudharma, Mandikata Mauryaputra, Akampita, Acalabharata, Metarya and Prabhasa.
In Jain traditional accounts, Gautama is believed to have gained Kevala Jnana (omniscience) immediately after the moksha (liberation) of Mahavira. He was succeeded by Sudharma who is believed to have gained omniscience after a further 12 years.
According to the elaboration of Debate with the Ganadhara by Jinabhadra, the learned Brahmin Gautama summoned the gods to a great sacrifice but instead they flew off to hear Mahavira preaching at his second samavasarana near by. In fury, Gautama confronted Mahavira in debate, as did ten other brahmins in succession, with the fordmaker converting them all by a demonstration, underpinned by his claim to omniscience. According to Svetambara texts, Gautama had a meeting with Keśī (ganadhara of Parshvanatha). Svetambaras write Gautama's name in new account books as a sign of auspiciousness in the new year.
Gautama is connected with prosperity as he fed some monks using his magical powers. Gautama is mentioned in the Exposition of Explanations, as an interpreter of Mahavira. It is further mentioned that they have been friends in their previous incarnations and will attain moksha in the one which they are now.
Dundas, Paul (2002) [1992], The Jains (Second ed.), Routledge, ISBN 0-415-26605-X
Shah, Natubhai (2004) [First published in 1998], Jainism: The World of Conquerors, vol. I, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-81-208-1938-2
von Glasenapp, Helmuth (1925), Jainism: An Indian Religion of Salvation [Der Jainismus: Eine Indische Erlosungsreligion], Shridhar B. Shrotri (trans.), Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass (Reprint: 1999), ISBN 978-81-208-1376-2