The 1998–99 NBA season was the Pacers' 23rd season in the National Basketball Association, and 32nd season as a franchise. The Pacers entered the season as a heavy favorite, because Michael Jordan retired and other members of the Chicago Bulls were broken up by their management. During the off-season, the team signed free agent Sam Perkins, who played in the 1991 NBA Finals with the Los Angeles Lakers, and the 1996 NBA Finals with the Seattle SuperSonics. After a lockout cut the season to just 50 games, the Pacers got off to a 15–5 start, then won their final four games to capture the Central Division title with a record of 33 wins and 17 losses.
Reggie Miller led the team in scoring averaging 18.4 points per game, while Rik Smits averaged 14.9 points and 5.6 rebounds per game, and Chris Mullin provided the team with 10.3 points per game. In addition, sixth man Jalen Rose contributed 11.1 points per game off the bench, while other sixth man Antonio Davis provided with 9.4 points and 7.0 rebounds per game. Dale Davis averaged 8.0 points and 8.3 rebounds per game, and Mark Jackson contributed 7.6 points and 7.9 assists per game. Rose and Antonio Davis both finished tied in third place in Sixth Man of the Year voting.
In the playoffs, the Pacers swept the Milwaukee Bucks 3–0 in the Eastern Conference First Round, and the 6th-seeded Philadelphia 76ers 4–0 in the Eastern Conference Semi-finals. The Pacers advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals for the second consecutive season, and the fourth time in six seasons. Once again, the Pacers were up against the New York Knicks. Despite being the 8th-seeded team in the Eastern Conference, the Knicks upset the Pacers in six games to reach the NBA Finals for the second time in six seasons, where they lost in five games to the San Antonio Spurs. It was also the final season the Pacers played at Market Square Arena, moving to the Conseco Fieldhouse the following season. Also following the season, Antonio Davis was traded to the Toronto Raptors.
For the season, the Pacers added gold pinstripe alternate road uniforms with navy blue side panels, which remained in use until 2005.



z - clinched division title
y - clinched division title
x - clinched playoff spot
Pacers on Basketball Reference