Ten Bulls or Ten Ox Herding Pictures (Chinese: shíniú  十牛 ,  Japanese: jūgyūzu  十牛図 , korean: sipwoo  십우) is a series of short poems and accompanying drawings used in the Zen tradition to describe the stages of a practitioner's progress toward enlightenment, and their return to society to enact wisdom and compassion.
The calf, bull, or ox is one of the earliest similes for meditation practice. It comes from the Maha Gopalaka Sutta (Majjhima Nikaya 33). It is also used in the commentaries, especially the one on the Maha Satipatthana Sutta (Digha Nikaya 22) and the Satipatthana Sutta (Majjhima Nikaya 10). As Buddhism spread throughout South-East Asia, the simile of the bull spread with it.
The well-known ten ox-herding pictures emerged in China in the 12th century. D.T. Suzuki mentions four Chinese versions of the Oxherding Pictures, by Ching-chu (Jp. Seikyo)(11th century), Tzu-te Hui (Jp. Jitoku)(1090-1159), an unknown author, and Kuòān Shīyuǎn (Jp. Kaku-an) (12th century).
The first series was probably made by Ching-chu in the 11th century, who may have been a contemporary of Kuòān Shīyuǎn. There are only five pictures in Ching-chu's version and the ox's colour changes from dark to white, representing the gradual development of the practitioner, ending in the disappearance of the practitioner.
Tzu-te Hui (自得慧暉, Zide Huihui, Jp. Jitoku) (1090-1159) made a version with six pictures. The sixth one goes beyond the stage of absolute emptiness, where Ching-chu's version ends. Just like Ching-chu's version, the ox grows whiter along the way.
A third version by an unknown author, with ten pictures, was the most popular in China. It derives from the Ching-chu and Tzu-te Hui series of pictures, and has a somewhat different series of pictures compared to Kuòān Shīyuǎn's version. The 1585-edition contains a preface by Chu-hung, and it has ten pictures, each of which is preceded by Pu-ming's poem, of whom Chu-hung provides no further information. In this version the ox's colour changes from dark to white.
The best known version of the oxherding pictures was drawn by the 12th century Chinese Rinzai Chán (Zen) master Kuòān Shīyuǎn (廓庵師遠, Jp. Kaku-an Shi-en), who also wrote accompanying poems and introductory words attached to the pictures. In Kuòān Shīyuǎn's version, there is no whitening process, and his series also doesn't end with mere emptiness, or absolute truth, but shows a return to the world, depicting Putai, the laughing Buddha. In Japan, Kuòān Shīyuǎn's version gained a wide circulation, the earliest one probably belonging to the fifteenth century.
Liaoan Qingyu (了菴清欲, Jp. Ryōan Seiyoku) (1288-1363) made another version with five pictures.
Verses by Kuòān Shīyuǎn; translation by Senzaki Nyogen (千崎如幻) (1876–1958) and Paul Reps (1895-1990); paintings traditionally attributed to Tenshō Shūbun (天章周文) (1414-1463).
The ox-herding pictures had an immediate and extensive influence on the Chinese practice of Chan Buddhism. According to Chi Kwang Sunim, they may represent a Zen Buddhist interpretation of the ten Bodhisattva bhumi, the ten stages on the Bodhisattva-path.
The pictures first became widely known in the West after their inclusion in the 1957 book, Zen Flesh, Zen Bones: A Collection of Zen and Pre-Zen Writings, by Paul Reps and Nyogen Senzaki. Alan Watts included a description of the Ten Bulls in The Spirit of Zen. The pictures went on to influence the work of John Cage, particularly in his emphasis on rhythmic silence, and on images of nothingness. The pictures, especially the last one ('In the Marketplace'), have provided a conceptual umbrella for those Buddhists seeking a greater engagement with the post-industrial global marketplace.
Cat Stevens' sixth studio album Catch Bull at Four is a reference to the 4th step towards enlightenment. On the album, the song Sitting refers to meditation, and the apprehensions that may result from the experiences resulting from enlightenment. Catch Bull at Four  was commercially successful and spent 3 weeks at number one in the Billboard album charts in 1972.
In the 1989 South Korean film Why Has Bodhi-Dharma Left for the East?, an ox escapes into the forest and one of the protagonists, a young boy, attempts to hunt it down through the bushes. During the opening scene of Apichatpong Weerasethakul's 2010 film Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives, a water buffalo stands tied to a tree before breaking loose and wandering into a forest.
An equivalent series of stages is depicted in the Nine Stages of Tranquility, used in the Mahamudra tradition, in which the mind is represented by an elephant and a monkey. The Dharma Fellowship, a Kagyu (Mahamudra) organisation, notes that the practice starts with studying and pondering the dharma, where-after the practice of meditation commences.
Buddhist Paths to liberation
Bodhi
Five Ranks
Monomyth
Nirvana
Spiritual bypassBackgroundRahula, Walpola (1978), Zen and the Taming of the Bull: Towards the Definition of Buddhist Thought, Gordon Fraser Book Publishers
Tan, Pia (2004), The Taming of the Bull. Mind-training and the formation of Buddhist traditions (PDF), archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-07-18CommentariesYamada, Mumon (2004), Lectures On The Ten Oxherding Pictures, University of Hawaii Press
Samy, AMA (2005), Zen: Awakening to Your Original Face, Cre-A
Shibayama, Zenkei (2012), A Flower Does Not Talk: Zen Essays, Tuttle Publishing
Daido Loori, John (2013), The Eight Gates of Zen: A Program of Zen Training, Shambhala PublicationsGeneralTerebess Online, Oxherding Pictures Index, huge collection of resources on the oxherding picturesZide Huihui (Jp. Jitoku Keiki) (1090-1159) version (six pictures)Terebess Asia Online, The Six Oxherding Pictures by 自得慧暉 Zide Huihui (Jitoku Keiki), 1090-1159Chinese Pu-Ming (Jp. Fumyō) version (ten pictures)Terebess Asia Online, The Ten Oxherding Pictures by 普明 Puming (Fumyō), an unknown authorKuòān Shīyuǎn (12th century) version (ten pictures)Paul Reps (1957), Zen Flesh, Zen Bones: A Collection of Zen and Pre-Zen Writings
Reverend Eshin, Ten Oxherding Pictures
John M. Koller, Ox-herding: stages of Zen-practiceExtended commentariesCommentary by D.T. Suzuki
Commentary by Shodo Harada
Commentary by Sheng Yen
Commentary by Ruben Habito
Commentary by Martine Batchelor
Commentary by Chögyam TrungpaTaming the ElephantDharma Fellowship, Deepening Calm-Abiding - The Nine Stages of Abiding
Skyflower Dharmacenter, Mahamudra Tranquility and InsightOtherA comparison between the Zen Buddhist Ten Oxherding Pictures and the Theory of Positive Disintegration
Dward Muzika, Awakening versus Liberation