A computing platform or digital platform is an environment in which a piece of software is executed. It may be the hardware or the operating system (OS), even a web browser and associated application programming interfaces, or other underlying software, as long as the program code is executed with it. Computing platforms have different abstraction levels, including a computer architecture, an OS, or runtime libraries. A computing platform is the stage on which computer programs can run.
A platform can be seen both as a constraint on the software development process, in that different platforms provide different functionality and restrictions; and as an assistant to the development process, in that they provide low-level functionality ready-made.  For example, an OS may be a platform that abstracts the underlying differences in hardware and provides a generic command for saving files or accessing the network.
Platforms may also include:
Hardware alone, in the case of small embedded systems. Embedded systems can access hardware directly, without an OS; this is referred to as running on "bare metal".
A browser in the case of web-based software. The browser itself runs on a hardware+OS platform, but this is not relevant to software running within the browser.
An application, such as a spreadsheet or word processor, which hosts software written in an application-specific scripting language, such as an Excel macro. This can be extended to writing fully-fledged applications with the Microsoft Office suite as a platform.
Software frameworks that provide ready-made functionality.
Cloud computing and Platform as a Service. Extending the idea of a software framework, these allow application developers to build software out of components that are hosted not by the developer, but by the provider, with internet communication linking them together. The social networking sites Twitter and Facebook are also considered development platforms.
A virtual machine (VM) such as the Java virtual machine or .NET CLR. Applications are compiled into a format similar to machine code, known as bytecode, which is then executed by the VM.
A virtualized version of a complete system, including virtualized hardware, OS, software, and storage. These allow, for instance, a typical Windows program to run on what is physically a Mac.Some architectures have multiple layers, with each layer acting as a platform to the one above it. In general, a component only has to be adapted to the layer immediately beneath it. For instance, a Java program has to be written to use the Java virtual machine (JVM) and associated libraries as a platform but does not have to be adapted to run for the Windows, Linux or Macintosh OS platforms. However, the JVM, the layer beneath the application, does have to be built separately for each OS.
AmigaOS, AmigaOS 4
Chrome OS
FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD
IBM i
Linux
Microsoft Windows
OpenVMS
Classic Mac OS - discontinued in 2011
macOS
OS/2
Solaris
Tru64 UNIX
VM
QNX
z/OSAndroid
Bada - discontinued in 2013
BlackBerry OS - discontinued in 2013
BlackBerry 10 - discontinued in 2022
Fire OS
Firefox OS - discontinued in 2016
iOS
iPadOS
Embedded Linux
Palm OS - discontinued in 2011
Symbian - discontinued in 2012
Tizen
WebOS
LuneOS
Windows Mobile - discontinued in 2010
Windows Phone - discontinued in 2017
kaiOSBinary Runtime Environment for Wireless (BREW)
Cocoa
Cocoa Touch
.NET
Mono
.NET Framework
Silverlight
Flash
AIR
GNU
Java
Java ME
Java SE
Java EE
JavaFX
JavaFX Mobile
LiveCode
Microsoft XNA
Mozilla Prism, XUL and XULRunner
Mozilla WebExtensions API is modeled after Google Chrome's API. Thus Firefox extensions are now largely compatible with their Chrome counterparts.
Web platform
Oracle Database
Qt
SAP NetWeaver
Shockwave
Smartface
Universal Windows Platform
Windows RuntimeOrdered roughly, from more common types to less common types:
Commodity computing platforms
ARM architecture based devices
Android smartphones
iPhone smartphones and iPad tablet devices running iOS or iPadOS, from Apple
Macintosh computers using Apple silicon.
Raspberry Pi or Gumstix full function miniature computers with Linux
ARM servers with Unix-like systems such as Linux or BSD variants
Newton devices running the Newton OS, from Apple
ChromeBooks from various manufacturers
Wintel, that is, Intel x86 or compatible personal computer hardware with Windows operating system
Macintosh, custom Apple Inc. hardware and Classic Mac OS and macOS operating systems, originally 68k-based, then PowerPC-based, then x86-based, now migrated to Apple silicon with ARM architecture CPUs
x86 with Unix-like systems such as Linux or BSD variants
CP/M computers based on the S-100 bus, maybe the earliest microcomputer platform
Video game consoles, any variety (PlayStation, Xbox, Nintendo)
3DO Interactive Multiplayer, that was licensed to manufacturers
Apple Pippin, a multimedia player platform for video game console development
Non-commodity RISC or Itanium processor based machines
Unix variants or Unix-like systems
SPARC architecture computers running Solaris, illumos, or Linux operating systems
POWER ISA, PowerPC, or Power ISA computers running IBM AIX or Linux operating systems
Itanium computers running HP-UX
DEC Alpha machines computers Tru64 UNIX
PowerPC or Power ISA computers running IBM i
DEC Alpha and Itanium computers running OpenVMS
Midrange computers with their custom operating systems
Mainframe computers with their custom operating systems, such as IBM z/OS
Supercomputer architecturesCross-platform
Platform virtualization
Third platform
Platform ecosystem Media related to Computing platforms at Wikimedia Commons
Ryan Sarver: What is a platform?