


This list charts the most successful Pakistani films screened at cinemas in Pakistan and overseas. Pakistani films generate income from several revenue streams including box office sales (admissions), theatrical exhibitions, television broadcast rights and merchandising. See List of highest-grossing films in Pakistan for domestic gross figures.
With a worldwide box-office gross of over ₨70 crore, Jawani Phir Nahi Ani 2 is often proclaimed to be the highest-grossing Pakistani film.
The following list shows Pakistan's top 30 highest-grossing films, which include films from all the Pakistani languages. These figures are not adjusted for ticket prices inflation.
   Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing 24 June 2022 in theaters around the world.This is the list of top 20 highest-grossing Pakistani films within local Pakistani cinemas, which include films from all the Pakistani languages (business by foreign films in Pakistan is not included). These figures are not adjusted for ticket prices inflation.
   Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing 24 June 2022 in Pakistani theaters.The following list shows Pakistan's top 15 highest-grossing opening weekends worldwide, which include films from all the Pakistani languages. These figures are not adjusted for ticket prices inflation.
This is the list of highest-grossing Pakistani films by year of release. These films are listed as per their worldwide gross figures at time of release. These figures are not adjusted for ticket prices inflation.
   Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing 24 June 2022 in theaters around the world.   Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing 24 June 2022 in theaters around the world.The Jawani Phir Nahi Ani franchise is Pakistan's first film franchise to gross over ₨100 crore.
   Background shading indicates that at least one film in the series is playing in the week commencing 24 June 2022 in theaters around the world.List of highest-grossing films in Pakistan
Lists of Pakistani films
Cinema of Pakistan
Lists of highest-grossing filmsThe History of Lollywood Decade By Decade (1947—present)
Best Pakistani Movies On IMDB
Pakistani Movies On IMDB