Avant Browser is a freeware web browser from a Chinese programmer named Anderson Che, which unites the Trident layout engine built into Windows (see Internet Explorer shell) with an interface intended to be more feature-rich, flexible and ergonomic than Microsoft's Internet Explorer (IE). It runs on Windows 2000 and above, including Windows 8, Windows 8.1 and Windows 10. Internet Explorer versions 6 through 11 are supported.
Version 2012 (released October 2011) was separated in two editions: Ultimate edition, which added the Gecko layout engine (used by Mozilla Firefox), allowing the user choose between both layout engines, and Lite edition which contains only the Trident layout engine.
Avant Browser was largely inspired by Opera, the first major browser to have a multiple document interface. The developer's objective was to wrap a comparable interface around the layout engine used by Internet Explorer, thereby achieving Opera-like ergonomics without suffering the frequent problems that browser had rendering pages tested only in Internet Explorer. In fact, it was initially released under the name "IEopera", though this was soon changed due to trademark concerns.
Later, Avant's developer, Anderson Che, has concentrated on adding user-requested features, and Avant was among the first browsers to have popup blocking, advertising server blocking, and one-click disabling of potential security vulnerabilities such as ActiveX, Java and JavaScript.
The Avant Browser's default search engine is a version of the Yahoo! search engine renamed Avantfind and is given a custom look. Other search engines are available via the address bar's "Quick Search" facility, and instructions on how to change the default to an engine of the user's choice have been posted by the very active Avant Browser user community.
The community has also created other tools and extensions for Avant, including registry files which allow it to use the Information Bar and other security enhancements of Windows XP SP2.
The developer also used to have a sister project known as Orca Browser, an Avant-like shell of Mozilla's Gecko layout engine as used in Firefox 3 using similar approaches to Flock. Orca Browser project is now discontinued. Gecko layout engine was included in Avant Browser version 2012 Ultimate edition, alongside the traditional Trident layout engine.
Avant was one of the twelve browsers offered to European Economic Area users of Microsoft Windows in 2010.
Avant Browser 11 (build 130 released on January 26, 2011) includes support for many toolbars that are compatible with Internet Explorer, a facility for users to create their own scripted toolbar buttons, and a password and form-filling wizard. 
A native bookmark system was also added n place of sharing Internet Explorer's Favorites. These bookmarks may be stored online with feeds, autofills, and browser settings.
This allows the user to synchronize any number of Avant installations on different computers. Avant can still share Internet Explorer's Favorites. This option was reintroduced by the developer after some users lamented its loss.
Another innovation is that Avant may now be run from a USB flash drive (or other portable storage device such as an MP3 player) without needing to be installed. In conjunction with Avant's session saving facility, this allows the user to halt a browsing session on one PC, move to another and resume viewing the same web pages.
Avant Browser 2012 Ultimate edition (build 3 released on October 25, 2011) added the Gecko layout engine (the rendering engine used by Mozilla Firefox), and the most recent release (build 168 released on April 6, 2012) also included the WebKit layout engine (the rendering engine used by Safari), making Avant Browser a three-engine browser. Layout engine is selectable by the user.
User-customizable tabbed interface
Progress bar on each tab (optional)
Tab locking, duplication, and drop-and-drag arrangement
Automatically save and reopen any number of pages
Can restore open pages after system crash
Undo menu for last 25 closed tabs
All pages open in single process, reducing resource demands
Multiple home pagesCompatible with many Internet Explorer toolbars and add-ins, including Google toolbar
Highlight marker to find keywords on any page (the words also used by the search engine)
Facility for user to add custom-made function buttons
RSS feed reader built in
URL alias facility to create keyboard shortcuts to favorite sites
Page zoom slider - 25% to 500%
Full desktop mode - hides toolbars
Full screen mode - hides toolbars and taskbar
Compact mode - saves interface space
Boss button - quickly hides browser
Tray icon - keeps Avant running in system tray for fast access (optional)
Mouse gestures (customizable)
Autoscroll facility for hands-free reading
Context-activated floating toolbars to save and edit images, text and Flash
Customizable right-click menu entries
Quick translation menu
15 interface languages available so far
Automatic page refresh at custom intervals
Sidebar access to:
Advanced search
Blocked URL record
History
Bookmarks
FeedsFully skinnable:
Range of bundled skin options (21 total)
Accessory application allows user to create own skins
Highly customizable:
Toolbars can be rearranged freely
Most functions may be accessed from either toolbar buttons or menus
All Buttons and menus are optionalPush-button quick blocking of unwanted items (Popups, Adverts, ActiveX, Java, Scripts, Flash, Video, Sound, Images)
Customizable black/white lists for popups and ad servers
Multiple proxy servers may be configured
Browsing tracks cleaner - can clear traces automatically
Windows XP Service Pack 2 security extensions can be integratedSearch bar with separate engines configurable for web, images, groups, directories and news
Search within site, search within page, and target word highlight buttons
Quick Search facility - user can configure any engine for searches from the address bar
Similar websites toolbar - searches in background for pages that relate to the currentOnline secure bookmark, feed and setting storage - allows access of same browser setup anywhere
Portable flash drive version allows running of Avant without installation
Bookmark search
Bookmark validation
Bookmark toolbar for fast link access
Bookmarks can be arranged in task-orientated groups that can be opened together or individually
Optionally uses Internet Explorer favoritesList of web browsers
Comparison of web browsers
Internet Explorer shell browsers
List of feed aggregators
Comparison of feed aggregatorsOfficial website