Tropical Storm Philippe is on track to deliver a dreary weekend to the Northeast, including a slug of tropical moisture which is raising the risk of flooding rainfall in an area that has been soaked repeatedly in recent weeks.
The storm is still far from the US mainland and just north of the Caribbean. But its projected track has echoes of Hurricane Lee in September, when the much-weakened system brought strong winds and rain to parts of the Northeast and Canada.
Philippe is expected to approach New England as a tropical storm on Sunday, but may lose some of its tropical nature as it approaches the coast. The severity of rain and wind will be the same regardless of whether it’s a tropical storm or a post-tropical storm at landfall.
For now, portions of New England and eastern New York are most likely to experience heavy rain and potential flooding. A Level 2 of 4 slight risk of excessive rainfall was issued for Saturday in these areas by NOAA’s Climate Prediction Center.
But the bull’s-eye of heaviest rainfall could shift if low pressure moving across the eastern US pulls Philippe closer to the Northeast. This potential shift could move the risk closer to the mid-Atlantic – an area where another deluge would be particularly worrisome.
Heavy rainfall is not expected to be as severe as last week, but a widespread 1 to 3 inches of rain is possible north of New York City in New York and into New England. Higher amounts closer up to 5 inches could fall where the heaviest rain sets up, most likely in Maine.
Heavy rainfall is not expected to be as severe as last week, but a widespread 1 to 2 inches of rain is possible across New York and New England. Higher amounts closer to 2 to 4 inches could fall where the heaviest rain sets up, likely in Maine.
In addition to heavy rain, gusty winds are possible across portions of New England and Atlantic Canada Saturday night into Sunday as Philippe comes ashore.
Philippe has quite a distance to travel before approaching the US and Canada but it will soon come in close contact with Bermuda. The island’s weather service issued a tropical storm warning Wednesday evening as Philippe closed in.
Bermuda is only 15 miles across, so landfalls are rare. Only eleven systems have made landfall on the island since 1851, according to data from NOAA. But Philippe won’t have to make landfall in order to unload strong wind gusts and heavy rain.
The Bermuda Weather Service issued a tropical storm watch for the island on Wednesday, since Philippe won’t have to make landfall in order to unload strong wind gusts and heavy rain.
Tropical-storm-force wind gusts are likely across Bermuda when Philippe makes its closest pass on Friday. Rain arrived on Thursday afternoon, ahead of any wind.
Philippe is expected to be a tropical storm as it swipes the island, so the risk of widespread damage is limited, but power outages are possible.
© 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
