Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
The Powerball jackpot swelled to an estimated $1.55 billion for Monday night’s drawing after weeks with no grand prize winner.
The new mammoth prize up for grabs Monday ranks as the third largest Powerball jackpot and fourth largest among US lottery jackpots, according to Powerball’s website.
If a lucky player matches all six numbers to win the jackpot, they will have the choice between an annuitized prize worth an estimated $1.55 billion or a lump sum payment estimated at $679.8 million – both before taxes, Powerball said.
The grand prize grew Saturday after no ticket matched all six numbers drawn, 47, 54, 57, 60, 65 and red Powerball 19.
There have been no Powerball jackpot winners since July 19, when a single ticket sold in California nabbed a grand prize worth $1.08 billion.
The Powerball jackpot is huge, but here are 3 better ways to increase your wealth
The upcoming drawing will be the 35th in this jackpot run. It’s the first time in Powerball’s history that back-to-back cycles have generated billion-dollar grand prizes, Powerball said in a news release.
While no one scored the jackpot during the last drawing Saturday, there were still some big wins.
Ten tickets matched five numbers to win $1 million prizes in California, Kansas, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Ohio, Texas and Wisconsin.
Another two tickets, sold in Iowa and Maine, matched all five white balls and won $2 million each because their holders activated a “power play” multiplier, Powerball said.
Overall, the odds of winning a prize are 1 in 24.9. But the odds of winning the jackpot are much slimmer, at 1 in 292.2 million, Powerball says.
The largest Powerball Jackpot ever won was a $2.04 billion prize from November 2022, followed by a $1.586 billion jackpot won in January 2016.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
