Oncology is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer
A medical professional who practices oncology is called an Oncologist.
Cancer survival has improved due to three main components: improved prevention efforts to reduce exposure to risk factors (e.g., tobacco smoking and alcohol consumption), improved screening of several cancers (allowing for earlier diagnosis), and improvements in treatment.
Cancers are often managed through discussion on multi-disciplinary cancer conferences where medical oncologists, surgical oncologists, radiation oncologists, pathologists, radiologists, and organ-specific oncologists meet to find the best possible management for an individual patient considering the physical, social, psychological, emotional, and financial status of the patient
It is very important for oncologists to keep up-to-date with the latest advancements in oncology, as changes in the management of cancer are quite common.
Because a cancer diagnosis can cause distress and anxiety, clinicians may use a number of strategies such as SPIKES for offering emotional support.
The name's etymological origin is the Greek word ὄγκος (óngkos), meaning 1
"burden, volume, mass" and 2
"barb", and the Greek word λόγος (logos), meaning "study"
The neoclassical term oncology was used from 1618, initially in neo-Greek, in cognizance of Galen's work on abnormal tumors, De tumoribus præter naturam (Περὶ τῶν παρὰ φύσιν ὄγκων).
Tobacco
Tobacco exposure is the leading cause of cancer and death from it
Smoking tobacco is associated with increased risk of death of over 15 varieties of cancer including lung, larynx, mouth, esophagus, throat, brain, bladder, kidney, liver, stomach, pancreas, colon, rectum, cervix, ovary, urinary bladder, prostate, head and neck, brain and blood
Smokeless tobacco (snuff or chewing tobacco) is associated with increased risks of cancers of the mouth, esophagus, and pancreas.Alcohol
Alcohol consumption increases risk of cancers of the mouth, throat, esophagus, larynx, liver, and breast
The risk of cancer is much higher for those who drink alcohol and also use tobacco.Obesity
Obese individuals have an increased risk of cancer of the breast, colon, rectum, endometrium, esophagus, kidney, pancreas, and gallbladder.
Age
Advanced age is a risk factor for many cancers
The median age of cancer diagnosis is 66 years.Cancer-Causing Substances
Cancer is caused by changes to certain genes that alter the way our cells function
Some of them are the result of environmental exposures that damage DNA
These exposures may include substances, such as the chemicals in tobacco smoke, or radiation, such as  ultraviolet rays from the sun and other carcinogens.
Infectious Agents
Certain infectious agents, including oncoviruses, bacteria, and parasites, can cause cancer.
Immunosuppression
The body's immune response plays a role in defending the body against cancer, a concept known mainly because certain cancers occur at a greatly increased prevalence among people with immunosuppression.Cancer screening is recommended for cancers of breast, cervix, colon, and lung.
Signs and symptoms usually depend on the size and type of cancer.
Breast cancer
Lump in breast and axilla associated with or without ulceration or bloody nipple discharge.
Endometrial cancer
Bleeding per vaginam.
Cervix cancer
Bleeding after sexual intercourse.
Ovarian cancer
Nonspecific symptoms such as abdominal distension, dyspepsia.
Lung cancer
Persistent cough, breathlessness, blood in the sputum, hoarseness of voice.
Head and neck cancer
Non-healing ulcer or growth, lump in the neck.
Brain cancer
Persistent headache, vomiting, loss of consciousness, double vision.
Thyroid cancer
Lump in the neck.
Oesophageal cancer
Painful swallowing predominantly with solid food, weight loss.
Stomach cancer
Vomiting, dyspepsia, weight loss.
Colon & rectal cancer
Bleeding per rectum, alteration of bowel habits.
Liver cancer
Jaundice, pain and mass in right upper abdomen.
Pancreatic cancer
Weight loss, jaundice.
Skin cancer
Non-healing ulcer or growth, mole with sudden increase in size or irregular border, induration, or pain.
Kidney cancer
Blood in urine, abdominal lump.
Bladder cancer
Blood in urine.
Prostate cancer
Urgency, hesitancy and frequency while passing urine, bony pain.
Testis cancer
Swelling of testis, back pain, dyspnoea.
Bone cancer
Pain and swelling of bones.
Lymphoma
Fever, weight loss more than 10% body weight in preceding 6 months and drenching night sweats which constitutes the B symptoms, lump in neck, axilla or groin.
Blood cancer
Bleeding manifestations including bleeding gums, bleeding from nose, blood in vomitus, blood in sputum, blood stained urine, black coloured stools, fever, lump in neck, axilla, or groin, lump in upper abdomen.Diagnostic and staging investigations depend on the size and type of malignancy.
Blood investigations including hemoglobin, total leukocyte count, platelet count, peripheral smear, red cell indices.
Bone marrow studies including aspiration, flow cytometry, cytogenetics, fluorescent in situ hybridisation and molecular studies.
Excision biopsy of lymph node for histopathological examination, immunohistochemistry, and molecular studies.
Blood investigations include lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), serum uric acid, and kidney function tests.
Imaging tests such as computerised tomography (CT scan), positron emission tomography (PET CT).
Bone marrow biopsy.
Biopsy for histopathology and immunohistochemistry.
Imaging tests like X-ray, ultrasonography, computerised tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and PET CT.
Endoscopy including Nasopharyngoscopy, Direct & Indirect Laryngoscopy, Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, Colonoscopy, Cystoscopy.
Tumor markers including alphafetoprotein (AFP), Beta Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (β-HCG), Carcinoembionic Antigen (CEA), CA 125, Prostate specific antigen (PSA).
Treatment depends on the size and type of cancer.
Breast cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, and targeted therapy (Her 2 neu inhibitors).
Cervix cancer
Treatment options include radiation, surgery and chemotherapy.
Endometrial cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.
Ovary cancer
Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy (VEGF inhibitors).
Lung cancer
Treatment options include surgery and robot-assisted surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy (EGFR & ALK inhibitors).
Head & Neck Cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiosurgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy (EGFR inhibitors).
Brain cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiosurgery with the Cyberknife System, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy (VEGF inhibitors).
Thyroid cancer
Treatment options include surgery and radioactive iodine.
Oesophageal cancer
Treatment options include radiation, chemotherapy, and surgery.
Stomach cancer
Treatment options include chemotherapy, surgery, radiation, and targeted therapy (Her 2 neu inhibitors).
Colon cancer
Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy (EGFR & VEGF inhibitors).
Rectum cancer
Treatment options include chemotherapy, radiation, surgery.
Liver cancer
Treatment options include surgery, Trans-arterial chemotherapy (TACE), Radio-frequency ablation (RFA), and multi-kinase (Sorafenib).
Pancreas cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.
Skin cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiation, targeted therapy (BRAF & MEK inhibitors), Immunotherapy (CTLA 4 & PD 1 inhibitors, and chemotherapy.
Kidney cancer
Treatment options include surgery, multi-kinase inhibitors, and targeted therapy (mTOR & VEGF inhibitors).
Bladder cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.
Prostate cancer
Treatment options include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, anti-androgens, and immunotherapy.
Testis cancer
Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation.
Bone cancer
Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation.It includes Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL):
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)
Chemotherapy with ABVD or BEACOPP regimen and Involved field radiation therapy (IFRT).
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)
Chemo-immunotherapy (R-CHOP) for B cell lymphomas, and chemotherapy (CHOP) for T cell lymphomas.Includes acute and chronic leukemias
Acute leukemias includes acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
Chronic leukemias include chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
Intensive chemotherapy phase for initial 6 months and maintenance chemotherapy for 2 years
Prophylactic cranial and stem cell transplantation for high-risk patients.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
Induction with chemotherapy (Daunorubicin + Cytarabine), followed by consolidation chemotherapy (High dose cytarabine)
Stem cell transplantation for high-risk patients.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
Chemo-immunotherapy (FCR or BR regimen) for symptomatic patients.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Targeted therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (Imatinib) as first-line treatment.The four main divisions:
Medical oncology: focuses on treatment of cancer with chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and hormonal therapy.
Surgical oncology: focuses on treatment of cancer with surgery.
Radiation oncology: focuses on treatment of cancer with radiation.
Clinical oncology: focuses on treatment of cancer with both systemic therapies and radiation.
Sub-specialties in Oncology:
Neuro-oncology: focuses on cancers of brain.
Ocular oncology: focuses on cancers of eye.
Head & Neck oncology: focuses on cancers of oral cavity, nasal cavity, oropharynx, hypopharyx and larynx.
Thoracic oncology: focuses on cancers of lung, mediastinum, oesophagus and pleura.
Breast oncology: focuses on cancers of breast
Gastrointestinal oncology: focuses on cancers of stomach, colon, rectum, anal canal, liver, gallbladder, pancreas.
Bone & Musculoskeletal oncology: focuses on cancers of bones and soft tissue.
Dermatological oncology: focuses on the medical and surgical treatment of skin, hair, sweat gland, and nail cancers
Genitourinary oncology: focuses on cancers of genital and urinary system.
Gynecologic oncology: focuses on cancers of the female reproductive system.
Pediatric oncology: concerned with the treatment of cancer in children.
Adolescent and young adult (AYA) oncology.
Hemato oncology: focuses on cancers of blood and stem cell transplantation
Preventive oncology: focuses on epidemiology & prevention of cancer.
Geriatric oncology: focuses on cancers in elderly population.
Pain & Palliative oncology: focuses on treatment of end stage cancer to help alleviate pain and suffering.
Molecular oncology: focuses on molecular diagnostic methods in oncology.
Nuclear medicine oncology: focuses on diagnosis and treatment of cancer with radiopharmaceuticals.
Psycho-oncology: focuses on psychosocial issues on diagnosis and treatment of cancer patients.
Veterinary oncology: focuses on treatment of cancer in animals.
Emerging specialties:
Cardiooncology is a branch of cardiology that addresses the cardiovascular impact of cancer and its treaments
Computational oncology
An example is PRIMAGE
This four-year EU-funded Horizon 2020 project was launched in December 2018
The project proposes a cloud-based platform to support decision making in the clinical management of malignant solid tumours, offering predictive tools to assist diagnosis, prognosis, therapies choice and treatment follow up, based on the use of novel imaging biomarkers, in-silico tumour growth simulation, advanced visualisation of predictions with weighted confidence scores and machine-learning based translation of this knowledge into predictors for the most relevant, disease-specific, Clinical End Points.Leukemia, Lymphoma, Germ cell tumors and early stage solid tumors which were once incurable have become curable malignancies now
Immunotherapies have already proven efficient in leukemia, bladder cancer and various skin cancer
For the future, research is promising in the field of physical oncology.
Survival of cancer has significantly improved over the past years due to improved screening, diagnostic methods and treatment options with targeted therapy.
Large multi-centric Phase III randomised controlled clinical trials by the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast & Bowel Project (NSABP) Medical Research Council (MRC), the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), and National Cancer Institute (NCI) have contributed significantly to the improvement in survival.Watson, Ian R.; Takahashi, Koichi; Futreal, P
Andrew; Chin, Lynda (2013)
"Emerging patterns of somatic mutations in cancer"
Nat Rev Genet
14 (10): 703–718
doi:10.1038/nrg3539
PMC 4014352
PMID 24022702.
Meyerson, Matthew; Gabriel, Stacey; Getz, Gad (2010)
"Advances in understanding cancer genomes through second-generation sequencing"
Nat Rev Genet
11 (10): 685–696
doi:10.1038/nrg2841
PMID 20847746
S2CID 2544266.
Katsanis, Sara Huston; Katsanis, Nicholas (2013)
"Molecular genetic testing and the future of clinical genomics"
Nat Rev Genet
14 (6): 415–426
doi:10.1038/nrg3493
PMC 4461364
PMID 23681062.
Mardis, Elaine R
(2012)
"Applying next-generation sequencing to pancreatic cancer treatment"
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
9 (8): 477–486
doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2012.126
PMID 22751458
S2CID 9981262.
Mukherjee, Siddhartha (2011)
The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer
Fourth Estate
ISBN 978-0-00-725092-9.
Vickers, Andrew (1 March 2004)
"Alternative Cancer Cures: "Unproven" or "Disproven"?"
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
54 (2): 110–118
CiteSeerX 10.1.1.521.2180
doi:10.3322/canjclin.54.2.110
PMID 15061600
S2CID 35124492."Comprehensive Cancer Information"
National Cancer Institute
January 1980
Retrieved 2016-01-16.
"NCCN - Evidence-Based Cancer Guidelines, Oncology Drug Compendium, Oncology Continuing Medical Education"
National Comprehensive Cancer Network
Retrieved 2016-01-16.
"European Society for Medical Oncology | ESMO"
www.esmo.org
Retrieved 2016-01-16.
