Macedonian Radio Television (Macedonian: Македонска радио-телевизија, transliteration: Makedonska radio-televizija) (or MRT), officially National Radio-Television (Macedonian: Национална Радиотелевизија, transliteration: Nacionalna Radiotelevizija) since 2019, is the public broadcasting organisation of North Macedonia
It was founded in 1993 by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia.
Its legally defined service is the production and broadcasting of radio and television programmes of all genres, which should satisfy the public information, cultural, educational and recreational needs of the people of North Macedonia.
MRT is directed by Petar Karanakov
Karanakov supervises 1,200 MRT staffers.
Radio in Vardar Macedonia began in 1941, when Skopje was administrative capital of Vardar Banovina in Kingdom of Yugoslavia
On 27 January 1941 Radio Skoplje (Радио Скопље) started broadcasting in Serbian and retransmitting some programs from Radio Belgrade
On 20 April 1941 Radio Skopje was relaunched under Bulgarian control as Radio Skopie (Радио Скопие), retransmitting some programs from Radio Sofia.
Broadcasting in Macedonian began on 28 December 1944 as Radio Skopje (Радио Скопје) with the live transmission of the Second Session of ASNOM
Since 1991 Macedonian Radio and Television is an independent radio and television broadcaster
In July 1993, MRT was admitted as a full active member of the European Broadcasting Union
MRT uses the acronym: MKRTV
With the enactment of the new broadcasting law on 24 April 1997, Macedonian Radio and Television was split into two parts: Macedonian radio-diffusion and Macedonian Radio-Television
According to article 77 of the broadcasting law, 61% of the collected broadcasting tax belongs to Macedonian Radio Television.
According to a government decision from March 2019, following the Prespa Agreement about renaming the country from "Macedonia" to "North Macedonia", MRT was officially renamed from "Macedonian Radio Television" to "National Radio Television" (Национална радиотелевизија)
As of July 2020 it still broadcasts under its old name, the new name only being used by the government.
Macedonian Television broadcasts 73 hours of programmes daily on its three national terrestrial and two international satellite channels.
TerrestrialMRT 1 broadcasts a continuous 24-hour programme
MRT 1 HD simulcasts the programme of MRT 1 in HD quality.
MRT 2 broadcasts programmes for the Albanian community in North Macedonia
MRT 2 HD simulcasts the programme of MRT 2 in HD quality.
MRT 3 broadcasts sports and entertainment 24-hour programme
MRT 3 HD simulcasts the programme of MRT 3 in HD quality.
MRT 4 broadcasts programmes for the national minority in North Macedonia
Turkish, Serbian, Romany, Vlach and Bosnian
MRT 4 HD simulcasts the programme of MRT 4 in HD quality.
MRT 5 broadcasts specialized program for children 24-hour programme
MRT 5 HD simulcasts the programme of MRT 5 in HD quality.
MRT Sobraniski Kanal was formed in 1991 as an experimental channel, but now it broadcasts the activities from the Assembly of the Republic of North Macedonia
MRT Sobraniski Kanal HD simulcasts the programme of MRT Sobraniski Kanal in HD quality.SatelliteMRT Sat started in 2000 and broadcasts a continuous 24-hour programme, which are a selection of programmes from MRT, as well as its original programme of 5 hours
The station also broadcasts to Australia & New Zealand through the Optus D2 Satellite via UBI World TV.
MRT 2 Sat was introduced in 2012 and broadcasts a continuous 24-hour programme in Albanian.The framework of the Macedonian Radio consists of three national channels, a satellite channel and a non-profit regional channel
It broadcasts 86.5 hours of programmes daily on its national and satellite channels
Macedonian Radio also broadcasts its programme over the Internet.
The First channel, Radio Skopje, broadcasts a continuous 24-hour programme
It mainly functions as a talk radio.
The Second channel, Radio 2, broadcasts a continuous 24-hour programme, too
It is focused on popular music and entertainment.
The Third channel of Radio Skopje, broadcasts programmes in all the languages of the national minorities in North Macedonia, including Albanian (since 1948); Turkish (since 1945) 5 hours; Vlach (since 1991); Romany (since 1991); Serbian (since 2003) and Bosnian (since 2003) all 30 minutes each per day.
The satellite channel, Radio Macedonia, commenced in July 2003, and broadcasts a 24-hour continual programme, which is a selection of programmes from Macedonian Radio and its original programme "Radio Macedonia" with a duration of 6 hours and 30 minutes.Kanal 103 provides FM broadcasting only for the region of Skopje with the mission of promoting avant-garde music and culture.
The process of transformation of MRTV in a public service broadcaster is not yet completed; it entailed the 1997 Law on Broadcasting Activities and the 2005 Broadcast Law
Editorial independence of MRTV is guaranteed by law but de facto lacking due to lack of independent funding and lack of independence of MRTV managerial bodies
MRTV executive directors in the last ten years remained close to the party in power
The network is funded by a license fee as well as by public budget contributions and advertising revenues (limited to 10% of airtime)
Budgetary needs, and the practice of ad hoc state budgetary funding, has created a "culture of dependence" in MRTV.
MRTV is supervised by the MRTV Council, whose members are appointed by the Parliament upon proposal by "authorised nominators" from civil society
The Council then elects the members of MRTV Management Board
Although formally only accountable to the legislature through its annual report and budget plan, MRTV remains informally accountable to the executive, undermining institutional autonomy
MRTV also risks neglecting cultural pluralism obligations, in terms of programmes for minorities, as well as lacking impartiality and distance from government/majority politicians.
Notable people who were employed in the Macedonian Radio Television include clarinetist and composer Tale Ognenovski who was a member of  the “Chalgii orchestra”, “Folk music orchestra” and “Authentic folk instruments orchestra” from 1960 until 1979.
MRT CenterOfficial website
Radio Skopje
Radio BitolaCoordinates: 42°0′0″N 21°27′0″E﻿ / ﻿42.00000°N 21.45000°E﻿ / 42.00000; 21.45000
