Jimmy Lee Swaggart (/ˈswæɡərt/; born March 15, 1935) is an American Pentecostal televangelist.
The television ministry, which began in 1971, and originally known as the “Camp Meeting Hour”, has a viewing audience both in the U.S
and internationally
The weekly Jimmy Swaggart Telecast and A Study in the Word programs are broadcast throughout the U.S
and on 78 channels in 104 countries, and over the Internet.
At the height of his popularity in the 1980s, his telecast was transmitted in excess of 3,000 stations and cable systems each week
His “Crusades” enabled him to travel throughout the contiguous United States, Canada, Europe, Africa, and South America.
Swaggart plays the piano and he also sings in a baritone voice
During the 1970s and 1980s, he sold in excess of 17 million LP albums.
In 1980, Swaggart received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Performance for Traditional Gospel.
The Jimmy Swaggart Ministries owns and operates the SonLife Broadcasting Network (SBN) and he is the senior pastor of the Family Worship Center which is located on Bluebonnet Blvd
in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Jimmy Lee Swaggart was born on March 15, 1935, in Ferriday, Louisiana, to fiddle player and Pentecostal preacher Willie Leon (known as "Sun" or "Son") Swaggart and Minnie Bell, daughter of sharecropper William Herron
They were related by marriage, as the maternal uncle of Son was Elmo Lewis, and was married to her sister Mamie
The extended family had a complex network of interrelationships: "cousins and in-laws and other relatives married each other until the clan was entwined like a big, tight ball of rubber bands."
He is the cousin of Rock-a-Billy pioneer Jerry Lee Lewis and country music star Mickey Gilley
He also had a sister, Jeanette Ensminger (1942–1999)
With his parents, Swaggart attended small Assemblies of God churches in Ferriday and Wisner.
In 1952, aged 17, Swaggart married 15 year-old Frances Anderson, whom he met in church in Wisner, Louisiana while he was playing music with his father, who pastored the Assembly of God Church there
They have a son named Donnie
Swaggart worked several part-time odd jobs to support his young family and also began singing Southern Gospel music at various churches.
According to his autobiography “To Cross a River”, Swaggart, along with his wife and son, lived in poverty during the 1950s as he preached throughout rural Louisiana, struggling to survive on an income of $30 a week (equivalent to $290 in 2021)
Being too poor to own a home, the Swaggarts lived in church basements, homes of pastors, and small motels
Sun Records producer Sam Phillips wanted to start a gospel line of music for the label (perhaps to remain in competition with RCA Victor and Columbia, who also had gospel lines at the time) and wanted Swaggart for Sun as the first gospel artist for the label.
His cousin Jerry Lee Lewis, who had previously signed with Sun, was reportedly earning $20,000 per week at the time
Although the offer meant a promise for significant income for him and his family, Swaggart turned Phillips down, stating that he was called to preach the gospel.
Preaching from a flatbed trailer donated to him, Swaggart began full-time evangelistic work in 1955
He began developing a revival-meeting following throughout the American South
 In 1960, he began recording gospel music record albums and transmitting on Christian radio stations
In 1961, Swaggart was ordained by the Assemblies of God; a year later he began his radio ministry
The statement made above --- The television ministry, which began in 1971, and originally known as the “Camp Meeting Hour” --- is incorrect
 The television ministry DID begin in 1971 but IT was never known as "The Campmeeting Hour."  That was the name of Swaggart's 15-minute weekday RADIO program that began in 1962
 The two earliest TV programs were called "The Jimmy Swaggart Telecast" (30 minutes at first, then 60 minutes) and "A Study in the Word," the 30-minute weekday teaching program
 In the late 1960s, Swaggart founded what was then a small church named the Family Worship Center in Baton Rouge, Louisiana; the church eventually became district-affiliated with the Assemblies of God.
In 1971, Swaggart began transmitting a weekly 30-minute telecast over various local television stations in Baton Rouge and also purchased a local AM radio station, WLUX (now WPFC)
The station broadcast Christian feature stories, preaching and teaching to various fundamentalist and Pentecostal denominations and playing black gospel, Southern gospel, and inspirational music
As Contemporary Christian music became more prevalent, the station avoided playing it
Swaggart sold many of his radio stations gradually throughout the 1980s and early 1990s
Jimmy Swaggart Ministries still operates several radio stations that operate under the name Sonlife Radio.
However, he is known for his cover of Chuck Girard's song "Sometimes Alleluia", which Swaggart used as the theme to his weekly and flagship namesake program
Girard himself being one of the pioneers of contemporary Christian music.
Swaggart wrote a book, Religious Rock n Roll: A Wolf in Sheep's Clothing, in 1987.
In his monthly periodical known as "The Evangelist" he wrote against worldliness in worship music, particularly referring to a Carman concert.
He also mentioned in the article that Christian leaders were in "terrible opposition" with him for preaching the truth against contemporary Christian music and its artists.
Swaggart has often preached that God does not borrow from the world to reach the youth, but has since changed his position on contemporary Christian music and has integrated its sound and style in his worship services such as Hillsong.
By 1975, the television ministry had expanded to more stations around the United States, and he began to use television as his primary preaching forum
In 1978, the weekly telecast was increased to an hour.
In 1980, Swaggart began a daily weekday telecast featuring Bible study and music, and the weekend, hour-long telecast included a service from either Family Worship Center (Swaggart's church) or an on-location crusade in a major city
In the early 1980s, the broadcasts expanded to major cities nationwide
By 1983, more than 250 television stations broadcast the telecast.
Throughout the 1980s, Jimmy Swaggart Ministries was one of many American Evangelical leaders who promoted the South African backed Mozambican National Resistance, aka RENAMO, which was accused of committing systematic war crimes during Mozambique's 15 year long civil war
In addition to moral support and publicity, Swaggart Ministries was repeatedly accused of providing funding and material support to the group
In September 1985, government forces supported by Zimbabwe captured RENAMO's main HQ inside Mozambique, Casa Banana in Gorongosa district
Among the materials left behind by retreating rebels were piles of Swaggart's 1982 publication, "How to Receive The Baptism in the Holy Spirit" translated into Portuguese
During the 1988 trial of Australian missionary Ian Grey, who coordinated much of the private support to RENAMO, it was claimed by the defendant that Swaggart Ministries worked through ex-Rhodesian soldier Michael T Howard's Shekinah Ministries to provide support to RENAMO
That year, extensive media coverage of Swaggart and his businesses in the wake of a sex scandal largely excluded these allegations
In 1991, Covert Action Magazine and the government of Zimbabwe both accused Swaggart ministries of continuing to fund RENAMO.
In 1988, Swaggart was accused of a sex scandal involving a prostitute, initially resulting in his suspension, and ultimately defrocking, by the Assemblies of God
Three years later Swaggart was implicated in another scandal involving prostitution
As a result, Swaggart's ministry became nonaffiliated, nondenominational, and significantly smaller than it was in the ministry's pre-scandal years.
Swaggart's first exposure was in retaliation for an incident in 1986 when he exposed fellow Assemblies of God minister Marvin Gorman, whom he accused of having several affairs
Once he was exposed, Gorman was defrocked from the Assemblies of God, and his ministry was all but ended
Gorman filed a successful lawsuit against Swaggart for defamation and conspiracy to ruin his reputation which led to the award of damages amounting to $10 million in 1991, reduced after an appeal and an out-of-court settlement to $1.75 million.
However, as a retaliatory measure, Gorman hired his son Randy and son-in-law Garland Bilbo to watch the Travel Inn on Airline Highway in Metairie, a suburb of New Orleans
A camera with a telephoto lens was placed in the window of the motel's Room 12, and draped with a black cloth
When Swaggart arrived, he reportedly went into Room 7
Randy Gorman and Garland Bilbo let the air out of the tires on Swaggart's vehicle
They called Marvin Gorman, whose church was located nearby
Randy Gorman and Garland Bilbo had taken photos of Swaggart outside Room 7 with Debra Murphree, a local prostitute
Gorman arrived at the Travel Inn a short while later and confronted Swaggart, although on details accounts from both sides differed.
According to Swaggart: The Unauthorized Biography of an American Evangelist, by Ann Rowe Seaman, Gorman secured a promise from Swaggart that he would publicly apologize to Gorman and start the process of Gorman's reinstatement to the Assemblies of God
  Gorman offered to remain silent if Swaggart would state publicly that he lied about Gorman's affairs
Gorman waited almost a year, then hand-delivered a note to Swaggart informing him his time was up; Swaggart did not respond
On February 16, 1988, Gorman contacted James Hamil, one of the 13-man Executive Presbytery of the Assemblies of God, who called G
Raymond Carlson, the Assemblies Superintendent
Carlson summoned Hamill and Gorman to fly to Assemblies of God headquarters in Springfield, Missouri, and arranged for an emergency meeting of the presbyters
He was shown photos of several men coming in and going out of Room 7 at the Travel Inn Motel in New Orleans
This was done to establish that the room was being used for prostitution
One of the men shown leaving Room 7 was Swaggart
The presbytery leadership of the Assemblies of God decided that Swaggart should be suspended from broadcasting his television program for three months.
According to the Associated Press, Murphree, who claimed to have posed nude for Swaggart, failed a polygraph test administered by a New York City Police Department polygraph expert
The test administrator concluded that Murphree had failed to tell the truth on all key questions concerning her statement
The test was administered after Murphree offered to sell the story to the National Enquirer for $100,000
Paul Levy, senior editor for the Enquirer, stated that the polygraph examiner had concluded Murphree was not truthful on six key questions, including one in which she was reportedly asked if she had fabricated the story
Levy stated that the Enquirer decided not to print her story due to the test results, her drug use, and the fact that she had arrest warrants in three states
Murphree failed questions about whether she was paid or promised money to "set up" Swaggart, and whether she made up the story to make money from it.
On February 21, 1988, without giving any details regarding his transgressions, Swaggart delivered what came to be known as his "I have sinned" speech on live television
He spoke tearfully to his family, congregation, TV audience, and ended it with a prayer, "I have sinned against You, my Lord, and I would ask that Your Precious Blood ..
would wash and cleanse every stain until it is in the seas of God's forgetfulness never to be remembered against me any more."
The Louisiana presbytery of the Assemblies of God initially suspended Swaggart from the ministry for three months
The national presbytery of the Assemblies of God soon extended the suspension to their standard two-year suspension for sexual immorality
His return to the pulpit coincided with the end of a three-month suspension originally ordered by the denomination
Believing that Swaggart was not genuinely repentant in submitting to their authority, the hierarchy of the Assemblies of God defrocked him, removing his credentials and ministerial license.
Swaggart then became an independent and non-denominational Pentecostal minister, establishing Jimmy Swaggart Ministries, based at the Family Worship Center in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and the Sonlife Broadcasting Network (SBN) which can be seen in the United States and other countries.
On October 11, 1991, Swaggart was found in the company of a prostitute for a second time
He was pulled over by a police officer in Indio, California, for driving on the wrong side of the road
With him in the vehicle was a woman named Rosemary Garcia
According to Garcia, Swaggart had stopped to propose sex to her on the side of the road
She later told reporters: "He asked me for sex
I mean, that's why he stopped me
That's what I do
I'm a prostitute." This time, rather than confessing of his sins to his congregation, Swaggart told those at Family Worship Center, "The Lord told me it's flat none of your business." Swaggart's son Donnie then announced to the audience that his father would be temporarily stepping down as head of Jimmy Swaggart Ministries for "a time of healing and counseling".
The scandals inspired the Ozzy Osbourne song "Miracle Man" on Osbourne's 1988 album No Rest for the Wicked, and a reference in the Iron Maiden song "Holy Smoke", a UK number three hit single, from the 1990 album No Prayer for the Dying.
During his 1988 concerts, Bruce Hornsby would begin his song "Defenders of the Flag" from Scenes from the Southside with a tongue-in-cheek dedication to Swaggart.
Similarities were also noted between heel World Wrestling Federation character Brother Love and Swaggart's style of preaching.
The Zodiac Mindwarp song "Airline Highway" is about Swaggart's hypocrisy, featuring the lyrics "Unoriginal sin led straight to my fall", and in the chorus, "Hey Jim, the crime's in your heart / You put love in a straitjacket, it tore you apart."
Swaggart was also referred to in several recorded live performances by Frank Zappa with a medley of Beatles' songs featuring rewritten lyrics referencing him.
Swaggart is heard throughout the 1988 Front 242 song "Welcome to Paradise".
A tearful Swaggart is seen during the music video for the Def Leppard song "Slang", appearing on-screen during the lyric "God damn".
In 1990, "the Jimmy Swaggart show" was included as part of a list of 64 disagreeable things read by Josie Jones and released as a spoken-word track under the name "Imperfect List" by "Big Hard Excellent Fish".
In 1999, rapper Eminem vaguely made reference to hypocritical preachers, most likely referring to many in the 1980s such as Swaggart and others in his song "Criminal" in the verse where he raps "...Oh, and please send me a brand new car/and a prostitute while my wife's sick in the hospital".
"Jesus He Knows Me", a 1991 song by Genesis, is a satire on televangelists, such as  Swaggart, Robert Tilton, and Jim Bakker.
In November 2021 multi-instrumentalist and songwriter Lingua Ignota released a compilation of readings called EPISTOLARY GRIEVING FOR JIMMY SWAGGART, made from letters she penned to Swaggart
This follows her sampling Swaggart's confession in her song "The Sacred Linament of Judgement" on her album Sinner Get Ready.
As of 2007 Jimmy Swaggart Ministries mainly comprised Family Worship Center, The Jimmy Swaggart Telecast, radio and television programs called A Study in the Word, SonLife Radio Network, a website (JSM.org], and a 24/7 cable and satellite television network, SonLife Broadcasting Network (SBN).
Swaggart's wife Frances hosts a television program, Frances and Friends, shown daily on SBN
Swaggart also hosts a daily Bible study program on SBN, The Message of the Cross
His son Donnie preaches at Family Worship Center and also preaches in churches across America and abroad
Donnie's son Gabriel is the ministry's youth pastor who leads Crossfire, Family Worship Center's youth ministry
SBN also delivers live broadcasts of all of its weekly services at Family Worship Center, as well as live broadcasts of all of its camp meetings.
Swaggart started SonLife Radio on the noncommercial FM band
Unlike his previous stations, SonLife was commercial-free and it did not sell time to outside ministries; the preaching and teaching were all produced in-house
The music which it played was primarily Southern Gospel
SonLife Radio is also streamed on the Internet.
Some controversy arose concerning the ministry raising money for stations that were never built.
The network's flagship station is WJFM in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Notes:
In 1973, Swaggart proposed to television producers in Nashville, Tennessee a television program including a fairly large music segment, a short sermon, and time for talking about current ministry projects, after two faltering attempts to tape the half-hour program in Baton Rouge and New Orleans
They accepted, and within weeks the Jimmy Swaggart Telecast was being broadcast around the United States.
In 1981, Swaggart launched a daily television program titled A Study in the Word
From the beginning, the primary cable channels which the program was aired on were CBN Cable (now Freeform), TBN, and the old PTL Network (now the Inspiration Network).
In 1988, Swaggart lost some of his broadcast and merchandise rights following his first prostitution scandal
In 1991, Swaggart's career as standard televangelist came to an end after more local TV stations cancelled their contracts with him following a second prostitution scandal.
In 2010, Jimmy Swaggart Ministries launched a 24 hour-a-day television network entitled the Sonlife Broadcasting Network (SBN), on DirecTV channel 344, Dish Network channel 257, Glorystar channel 125, AT&T U-verse, Verizon Fios, and various cable TV providers and broadcast stations.
SBN is available in the U.S
through Free To Air (FTA) satellite television
It is also available in Australia and New Zealand.
SBN is also available 24 hours a day in the United Kingdom on SKY (Channel 593), Freesat (Channel 695) and Freeview (Channel 239)
It is also shown on DSTV channel 345 for African viewers.
In autumn 1984, Swaggart opened Jimmy Swaggart Bible College (JSBC)
The college originally provided education and communication degrees
It flourished during the 1980s.
In 1986, Ray Trask is appointed as president of JSBC.
In the fall of 1987 enrollment peaked at 1,450 students.
JSBC enrollment dropped drastically in 1988 when students left as a result of Swaggart's scandal followed by accreditation issues
In 1988 the enrollment at the Bible college was projected to drop 72% that year but the school was planning to proceed with plans to open a theological seminary
Enrollment in August 1988 was projected to be about 400 students, compared to 1,451 students last year in 1987
The estimate was based on the number of students who had registered and the inquiries from potential students.
In 1988, Ray Trask, leaves his position as president of JSBC
 That July the college dormitories were re-branded and listed as apartments.
In 1991, JSBC was renamed to World Evangelism Bible College and enrollment dropped to 370 students
The college shut down programs in music, physical education, secretarial science, and communications that October and disbanded its basketball team
 In November "the college laid off three Bible professors and an English professor, effective at the end of the fall semester."
In 1992, Bernard Rossier resigns as president of Jimmy Swaggart's World Evangelism Bible College and Seminary.
In 2019, JSBC offered Associate of Arts and Bachelor of Arts degrees, both in Biblical Studies
The College was not accredited but was seeking accreditation at that time.
In 2020, Ray Trask, former JSBC President at Jimmy Swaggart Bible College died
 Mr
Trask served as JSBC president from 1986 to 1988.
In 2021, Gabriel Swaggart, grandson of Jimmy Swaggart, is the President of JSBC
JSBC stopped offering online classes around 2020 in one of many steps to seek accreditation
 JSBC lists a total of six faculty/staff members.
In 2022, Gabriel Swaggart still remains as President of JSBC
 Under "accreditation" the college website states "JSBC is a corresponding institution with The Transnational Association of Christian Schools (TRACS)."  JSBC lists five college administrators, six faculty, and one staff member.
Swaggart has written about 50 Christian books offered through his ministry
He is the author of the Expositor's Study Bible, 13 study guides and 38 commentaries on the Bible
The ministry also publishes a monthly magazine, The Evangelist.
Since October 10, 1952, Swaggart has been married to Frances Swaggart (née Anderson, born August 9, 1937)
They have one son, Donnie (born October 18, 1954), named after Jimmy Swaggart's brother who died in infancy
He has three grandchildren and 10 great-grandchildren Abby, Caroline, Mackenzie, Samantha, Zack, Ryder, and many more .
Donnie and his son Gabriel are also preachers, making three generations of the Swaggart family to have become involved in ministerial work.
In 1982, Swaggart founded Family Christian Academy (FCA)
The school was originally run by Swaggart, but is now run by Carolyn Richards, Swaggart's grandson's mother-in-law.
Jimmy Swaggart Ministries
Jimmy Swaggart at IMDb
