E-Prime (short for English-Prime or English Prime, sometimes denoted É or E′) is a version of the English language that excludes all forms of the verb to be, including all conjugations, contractions and archaic forms.
Some scholars advocate using E-Prime as a device to clarify thinking and strengthen writing
A number of other scholars have criticized E-Prime's utility.
D
David Bourland Jr., who had studied under Alfred Korzybski, devised E-Prime as an addition to Korzybski's general semantics in the late 1940s
Bourland published the concept in a 1965 essay entitled "A Linguistic Note: Writing in E-Prime" (originally published in General Semantics Bulletin)
The essay quickly generated controversy within the general semantics field, partly because practitioners of general semantics sometimes saw Bourland as attacking the verb 'to be' as such, and not just certain usages.
Bourland collected and published three volumes of essays in support of his innovation
The first (1991), co-edited by Paul Dennithorne Johnston, bore the title: To Be or Not: An E-Prime Anthology.
For the second, More E-Prime: To Be or Not II, published in 1994, he added a third editor, Jeremy Klein
Bourland and Johnston then edited a third book, E-Prime III: a third anthology, published in 1997.
In the English language, the verb 'to be' (also known as the copula) has several distinct functions:
identity, of the form "noun copula definite-noun" [The cat is my only pet]; [The cat is Garfield]
class membership, of the form "definite-noun copula noun" [Garfield is a cat]
class inclusion, of the form "noun copula noun" [A cat is an animal]
predication, of the form "noun copula adjective" [The cat is furry]
auxiliary, of the form "noun copula verb" [The cat is sleeping]; [The cat is being bitten by the dog]
The examples illustrate two different uses of 'be' as an auxiliary
In the first, 'be' is part of the progressive aspect, used with "-ing" on the verb; in the second, it is part of the passive, as indicated by the perfect participle of a transitive verb.
existence, of the form "there copula noun" [There is a cat]
location, of the form "noun copula place-phrase" [The cat is on the mat]; [The cat is here]Bourland sees specifically the "identity" and "predication" functions as pernicious, but advocates eliminating all forms for the sake of simplicity
In the case of the "existence" form (and less idiomatically, the "location" form), one might (for example) simply substitute the verb "exists"
Other copula-substitutes in English include taste, feel, smell, sound, grow, remain, stay, and turn, among others a user of E-prime might use instead of to be.
Words not used in E-prime include: be, being, been, am, is, isn't, are, aren't, was, wasn't, were, and weren't.
Contractions formed from a pronoun and a form of to be are also not used, including: I'm, you're, we're, they're, he's, she's, it's, there's, here's, where's, how's, what's, who's, and that's
E-Prime also prohibits contractions of to be found in nonstandard dialects of English, such as ain't.
One could rewrite the different functions of "to be" as follows:
"The cat is my only pet": "I have only a pet cat".
"The cat is Garfield": "I call my cat Garfield".
"Garfield is a cat": "I call my cat Garfield".
"A cat is an animal": "'Cat' denotes an animal".
"The cat is furry": "The cat feels furry".
"The cat is sleeping": "The cat sleeps".
"The dog is chasing the cat": "The dog chases the cat".
"There is a cat": "I can see a cat".
"The cat is on the mat": "The cat sits on the mat".
"The cat is here": "I have the cat with me".Bourland and other advocates also suggest that use of E-Prime leads to a less dogmatic style of language that reduces the possibility of misunderstanding or conflict.
Kellogg and Bourland describe misuse of the verb to be as creating a "deity mode of speech", allowing "even the most ignorant to transform their opinions magically into god-like pronouncements on the nature of things".
While teaching at the University of Florida, Alfred Korzybski counseled his students to  eliminate the infinitive and verb forms of "to be" from their vocabulary, whereas a second group continued to use "I am," "You are," "They are" statements as usual
For example, instead of saying, "I am depressed," a student was asked to eliminate that emotionally primed verb and to say something else, such as, "I feel depressed when ..." or "I tend to make myself depressed about ..."
Korzybski observed improvement "of one full letter grade" by "students who did not generalize by using that infinitive".
Albert Ellis advocated the use of E-Prime when discussing psychological distress to encourage framing these experiences as temporary (see also Solution focused brief therapy) and to encourage a sense of agency by specifying the subject of statements
According to Ellis, rational emotive behavior therapy "has favored E-Prime more than any other form of psychotherapy and I think it is still the only form of therapy that has some of its main books written in E-Prime"
However, Ellis did not always use E-Prime because he believed it interferes with readability.
Laws of Form by G
Spencer-Brown, 1969 (except for one statement)
Quantum Psychology, by Robert Anton Wilson (1990)
Worlds of Wonder: How to Write Science Fiction & Fantasy by David Gerrold has a chapter about (and written in) E-Prime
The New American Standard Bible in E-Prime, composed by Dr
David F
Maas
Scoundrel Days: A Memoir, 2017 Brentley Frazer
An Insider’s Guide to Robert Anton Wilson by Eric WagnerMany authors have questioned E-Prime's effectiveness at improving readability and reducing prejudice (Lakoff, 1992; Murphy, 1992; Parkinson, 1992; Kenyon, 1992; French, 1992, 1993; Lohrey, 1993)
These authors observed that a communication under the copula ban can remain extremely unclear and imply prejudice, while losing important speech patterns, such as identities and identification
Further, prejudices and judgments that are made are more difficult to notice or refute
James D
French, a computer programmer at the University of California, Berkeley, summarized ten arguments against E-Prime (in the context of general semantics) as follows:
The elimination of a whole class of sentences results in fewer alternatives and is likely to make writing less, rather than more, interesting
One can improve bad writing more by reducing use of the verb 'to be' than by eliminating it.
"Effective writing techniques" are not relevant to general semantics as a discipline, and therefore should not be promoted as general semantics practice.
The context often ameliorates the possible harmful effects from the use of the is-of-identity and the is-of-predication, so it is not necessary to eliminate all such sentences
For example, "George is a Judge" in response to a question of what he does for a living would not be a questionable statement.
To be statements do not only convey identity but also asymmetrical relations ("X is higher than Y"); negation ("A is not B"); location ("Berlin is in Germany"); auxiliary ("I am going to the store") etc., forms we would also have to sacrifice.
Eliminating to be from English has little effect on eliminating identity
For example, a statement of apparently equal identification, "The silly ban on copula continues," can be made without the copula assuming an identity rather than asserting it, consequently hampering our awareness of it.
Identity-in-the-language is not the same thing as the far more important identity-in-reaction (identification)
General semantics cuts the link between the two through the practice of silence on the objective levels, adopting a self-reflexive attitude, e.g., "as I see it" "it seems to me" etc., and by the use of quotation marks—without using E-Prime.
The advocates of E-Prime have not proven that it is easier to eliminate the verb to be from the English language than it is to eliminate just the is-of-identity and the is-of-predication
It may well be easier to do the latter for many people.
One of the best languages for time-binding is mathematics, which relies heavily on the notion of equivalence and equality
For the purposes of time-binding, it may be better to keep to be in the language while only cutting the link between identity-in-the-language and identification-in-our-reactions.
E-Prime makes no distinction between statements that cross the principles of general semantics and statements that do not
It lacks consistency with the other tenets of general semantics and should not be included into the discipline.According to an article (written in E-Prime and advocating a role for E-Prime in ESL and EFL programs) published by the Office of English Language Programs of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs in the State Department of the United States, "Requiring students to avoid the verb to be on every assignment would deter students from developing other fundamental skills of fluent writing."
Evidentiality
Coverb
Constrained writing
English passive voice
Active voice
General semantics
Grammatical voice
Linguistic prescription
Linguistic relativity
OulipoExcerpt from Quantum Psychology, 1990
Beyond Is: Creative Writing with English Prime by Brentley Frazer
E-Prime! – The Fundamentals, by D
David Bourland, Jr
Accessed: 8 December 2015.
Speaking in E-Prime - by E
W
Kellogg III
Accessed: 8 December 2015.
E-prime: The Spirit and the Letter, by Ralph E
Kenyon Jr.
Discovering E-Prime, by Elaine C
Johnson
E-Prime and Linguistic Revision, by C
A
Hilgartner
