To Catch a Thief is a 1955 American romantic thriller film directed by Alfred Hitchcock, from a screenplay by John Michael Hayes based on the 1952 novel of the same name by David Dodge
The film stars Cary Grant as a retired cat burglar who has to save his reformed reputation by catching an impostor preying on the wealthy tourists (including the daughter of a wealthy widow, played by Grace Kelly) of the French Riviera.
Retired jewel thief John "The Cat" Robie is suspected by the police in a string of burglaries on the French Riviera
When they come to his hilltop villa to question him, he slips their grasp and heads to a restaurant owned by his friend Bertani
The restaurant's staff are members of Robie's old gang, who have been paroled for their work in the French Resistance during World War II
They are angry at Robie because they are all under suspicion as long as the new Cat is active
When the police arrive at the restaurant looking for Robie, Foussard's daughter spirits him to safety; Danielle is a young woman who fancies him dearly.
Robie realizes he can prove his innocence by catching the new Cat in the act
He enlists the aid of an insurance man, H
H
Hughson, who reluctantly discloses a list of the most expensive jewelry owners currently on the Riviera
American tourists Jessie Stevens, a wealthy nouveau riche widow, and her daughter Frances, top the list
Robie strikes up a friendship with them
Frances feigns modesty at first, but kisses Robie at the end of the night before retiring to her room.
The day after, Frances invites Robie to a swim at the beach, where Robie runs into Danielle
 He keeps up his cover of being a wealthy American tourist, despite Danielle's jealous barbs about his interest in Frances
Frances accompanies Robie on a "picnic" to a villa where Robie suspects the new Cat might break in
Frances reveals that she knows Robie's real identity
He initially denies it, but concedes it that evening when she has invited him to her room to watch a fireworks display
They kiss passionately.
The next morning, Jessie discovers her jewels are gone
Frances accuses Robie of using her as a distraction so he could steal her mother's jewelry
The police are called, but by the time they reach Jessie's room, Robie has disappeared.
Later, Robie is staking out an estate at night when he is attacked by an unknown assailant
A second attacker raises a wrench and appears to hit Robie, who falls off the estate's seawall into the water
But when the police reach the body in the water, it turns out to be Foussard, one of the staff at Bertani's restaurant.
The police chief publicly announces that Foussard was the jewel thief, but, as Robie points out privately in the abashed Hughson's presence, this would have been impossible because Foussard had a wooden leg, and could not climb on rooftops.
Foussard's funeral is interrupted by Danielle's loud accusation that Robie is responsible for her father's death
Outside the graveyard, Frances apologizes to Robie and confesses her love
Robie asks Frances to arrange his attendance at a fancy masquerade ball, where he believes the Cat will strike again.
Robie accompanies Frances to the ball dressed as a masked Moor
The police hover nearby
Upstairs, the cat burglar silently cleans out several jewel boxes
When Jessie addresses the Moor as "John" and asks him to go and get her "heart pills", the authorities are tipped off as to his identity
Upon the masked Moor's return, the police wait as he and Frances dance together all night
When the masked Moor and Frances go to her room, the mask is removed: it was Hughson, who switched places with Robie to conceal Robie's exit.
Robie lurks on the rooftop, and his patience is finally rewarded when he spots a figure in black
However, just as his pursuit begins, the police throw a spotlight on him and demand he halt
He flees as they shoot at him, but he nonetheless manages to corner his foe with jewels in hand
Unmasked, his nemesis turns out to be Danielle
She loses her footing on the roof, but Robie grabs her hand before she can fall
While she hangs in his grasp, he forces her to confess to the police and admit that Bertani was the ringleader of this gang.
Robie speeds back to his villa
Frances follows to convince him that she has a place in his life
He agrees but looks less than thrilled when she says, "Mother will love it up here."
Cary Grant as John Robie ("The Cat")
Grace Kelly as Frances Stevens
Jessie Royce Landis as Jessie Stevens
John Williams as H
H
Hughson
Charles Vanel as Monsieur Bertani
Brigitte Auber as Danielle Foussard
Jean Martinelli as Foussard, Danielle's father
Georgette Anys as Germaine, housekeeper
René Blancard as Commissaire Lepic (uncredited)
Paul Newlan as Vegetable Man in Kitchen (uncredited)Alfred Hitchcock makes his signature cameo, approximately ten minutes into the film, as a bus passenger sitting next to Cary Grant.To Catch a Thief was the director's first film (of five) made using the VistaVision widescreen process, and the last of the three Hitchcock films with Grace Kelly
The film was the penultimate collaboration with Cary Grant; only North by Northwest (1959) followed
It is also about a man with a mistaken identity who goes on a breakneck adventure to prove his innocence.
The costumes were by Edith Head, including Kelly's memorable gold lamé gown for the film's costume ball.
The car driven by Grace Kelly was a metallic blue 1953 Sunbeam Alpine Mk I.
To Catch a Thief was filmed largely in the Paramount Studios, Hollywood, California, and on location in the Alpes-Maritimes of southeastern France, on the Mediterranean coast
It included the resorts of Cannes, Nice, Villefranche-sur-Mer and Saint-Jeannet.
Crucial to the film's success in shooting on location was the presence of unit production manager C.O
"Doc" Erickson
He had developed a reputation for his work on prior Paramount films that had relied on a great amount of location photography such as Shane (1953) and Secret of the Incas (1954)
Erickson thoroughly researched the logistics of shooting in the South of France and communicated with Bill Mull, the production manager on Little Boy Lost (1953).
To Catch a Thief is the only Hitchcock film released by Paramount that is still owned and controlled by the company
The others were sold to Hitchcock in the early 1960s and are currently distributed by Universal Studios.
The film drew mixed reviews from critics, with some enjoying Grant and Kelly in the lead roles as well as the French Riviera setting, while others expressed disappointment at the lack of suspense compared to earlier Hitchcock films.
Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote in a positive review that the film "comes off completely as a hit in the old Hitchcock style ..
Mr
Grant and Miss Kelly do grandly, especially in one sly seduction scene." Variety wrote that while the film was "not the suspense piece one usually associated with the Alfred Hitchcock name," it was "strong on sight and performance values" though it had "some plot weaknesses and is not as smooth in the unfolding as one might expect from an upper 'A' presentation."
Harrison's Reports wrote, "Alfred Hitchcock has not endowed the action with as much suspense as one might expect in a picture produced and directed by him; nevertheless, its story of a one-time jewel robber who sets out to establish his innocence by catching a thief who was using his technique is tight and swiftly-paced, and constantly offers dramatic and comical developments." Richard L
Coe of The Washington Post called it "one of those de luxe pictures in which everyone lives in glorious workless luxury on the French Rivera, looks wonderful, speaks amusingly and is unconcerned with transit strikes or hurricanes
I loved every minute of it."
Philip K
Scheuer of the Los Angeles Times was also positive, calling Grant and Kelly "ideal in the romantic leads" and the dialogue "daring but delightful," adding, "Above all, there is the spell of the French Riviera—a lazy, laissez-faire thing that apparently captivated the director as much as it will audiences in the soft, beguiling hues of its Technicolor and VistaVision."
John McCarten of The New Yorker dismissed the film as "an Alfred Hitchcock picture that makes you wonder what has happened to the man ..
As the heiress, Grace Kelly is very pretty
She does not, presumably, try to act." The Monthly Film Bulletin wrote, "Even a comedy thriller needs considerably more in the way of plain excitement and tension than To Catch a Thief provides, and Hitchcock's celebrated habit of playing tricks with the audience ..
seem a poor substitute for the real thing."
The Guardian called the film "a thorough disappointment," writing that Hitchcock had "failed so completely that one can only wonder if, in this tale of high-class burglary on the Côte d'Azur, he has not altogether abandoned his devotion to 'tension.' Certainly the 'whodunnit' element in this film is remarkably slack; the unmasking of the master criminal, which is the climax of the story, comes as mildly as bread and milk."
François Truffaut wrote "To Catch a Thief completely satisfies all [Hitchcock's] fans—the snobbiest and the most ordinary—and still manages to be one of the most cynical films Hitchcock has ever made."
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 96% based on reviews from 50 critics, with an average rating of 8.00/10, with the critical consensus reading: "It may occasionally be guilty of coasting on pure charm, but To Catch a Thief has it in spades -- as well as a pair of perfectly matched stars in Cary Grant and Grace Kelly."
Robert Burks won the Academy Award for Best Cinematography, while Hal Pereira, Joseph McMillan Johnson, Samuel M
Comer and Arthur Krams were nominated for Best Art Direction, and Edith Head was nominated for Best Costume Design.
In 2002, American Film Institute included the film in AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions (#46).
In May 2018, it was announced that Viacom was set to adapt the film as a Spanish-language television series
It was launched in October 2019 as Atrapa a un ladrón (es).
List of American films of 1955De Rosa, Steven (2001)
Writing with Hitchcock: The Collaboration of Alfred Hitchcock and John Michael Hayes
Faber and Faber
ISBN 0571199909.
Orengo, Nico (2006)
La Guerra del Basilico (The Basil War (in Italian)
Einaudi
ISBN 880618296X.
Spoto, Donald (1999)
The Dark Side of Genius
Da Capo
ISBN 0-306-80932-X.
Vest, James M
(2003)
Hitchcock and France: The Forging of an Auteur
Praeger
ISBN 0275970892."Two Interviews About To Catch a Thief" by Tifenn Brisset, Film International magazine Vol
11, No
6, 2013, pages 13–21
Interviews with French script supervisor Sylvette Baudrot conducted September 2011 and actress Brigitte Auber, September 2011, March 2013, regarding their work on the film and with Cary Grant and Alfred Hitchcock
Discussion of a different ending and script differences
Twelve color photographs, nine pages.To Catch a Thief at IMDb
To Catch a Thief at AllMovie
To Catch a Thief at the TCM Movie Database
To Catch a Thief at the American Film Institute Catalog
To Catch a Thief at Rotten Tomatoes
Historic reviews, photo gallery at CaryGrant.net
