Tools used in traditional timber framing date back thousands of years
Similar tools are used in many cultures, but the shapes vary and some are pulled rather than pushed.
Conversion of logs into timbers was often done by someone other than the timber framer including a lumberjack, sawyer, farmer, or laborer using a variety of tools including:
Whipsaw types of rip saws used in the conversion of logs into timbers in a saw pit
felling, carpenter's, and broad axes are used in hewing.
Sawmill
Wood splitting, also called riving uses wedges, splitting mauls, and/or froes.
Historically most timbers were used green but some went through a process of wood drying using some tools and equipment.Tools for marking out and measuring:
A rule, now better known as a ruler and similar to a yard stick, is used to measure.
Repeated measurements often use a storey pole
Carpenter's marks were made with a race knife, chisel, gouge, saw, grease pencil, chalk pencil, or lead pencil.
Chalk line or ink line used to snap lines on the wood
Ink and a slurry of charcoal were used like chalk.
Carpenter pencil
Scratch awl or similar tools were used to scratch lines on wood before the pencil was commonly used beginning in the 19th century in the U.S.
Try square
Steel square is also known as a framing square
Historically a square with measurement markings on it was known as a "square rule" which is also a layout method.
Combination square
A Plumb-bob on a string is sometimes used with a plumb-rule or plumb-square to measure vertical or horizontal and to transfer marks between timbers while scribing.
Spirit level
Dividers Used in measuring and proportioning
Layout floor - a large, flat surface to mark lines and scribe timbers.Saw
Crosscut saws to cut timbers to length and in making joints.
Japanese saws are special saws used in woodworking including timber framing
Axes were sometimes used to cut timbers to length and in joinery.
Hatchet
Adzes are of many shapes and names.
Framing Chisels are heavy duty
In Western carpentry common sizes are 1 1/2 and 2 inches wide
They are designed to be struck with a mallet
A slick is a very large chisel designed to be pushed by hand, not struck.
drills for boring holes in timber framing were typically T-auger
The cutting edge of the bit can be of many shapes, the spiral auger being the standard shape since the 19th century.
Timber framers boring machines were invented by 1830 and hold an auger bit
They made mortising easier and faster.
Draw knives are used to chamfer edges of beams and shape pegs (treenails)
Sometimes, particularly in wooden bridge building the pegs were shaped by being driven through a hole in a heavy piece metal.
Historically timbers meant to be seen in houses were smoothed with a hand plane (Japanese plane including  what is called a spear plane, yariganna or yari-kanna) and decorated with a chamfer or bead.
Twybil The name literally "two blades", historically rare in the U.S.
Bisaigue A French tool with similarities to a long handled twybillCircular saw
Drill
Band saw
Router (woodworking)
Power planers
One or two sided stationary rotary, thickness planers in a shop and up to a four-sided planer (timber sizer) at a mill.
Hand held rotary power planers up to twelve inches wide.
Chain mortiser
A few modern framers use computer numerical control (CNC) machines to cut joinery.
Chain sawA Froe is struck with a mallet to split blocks of wood into rough sizes for making pegs.
Large and long timbers are split (riven) with wedges
Shaving horse may be used in making pegs
Draw-bore pins temporarily hold a frame together during construction.
Iron dogs or log dogs are used to hold timers during hewing, scribing or historically to repair or reinforce a joint
Sawhorses, short sawhorses are called ponies.Gin pole or shear legs may be used in lifting wall sections or timbers.
Pike pole used to push wall sections up during a barn raising
Rope is used to lift or pull objects, sometimes in combination with a windlass, bullwheel, or block and tackle.
Cranes are sometimes used to lift assemblies and materials.
Commander or beetel is a large, long handled mallet for forcing timbers together or apart.
Rollers, carts, or other lifting equipment are used to move the heavy timbersTools require sharpening and replacing handles.
file (tool)
sharpening stone
Grindstone (tool)
hiring a blacksmith
mechanics tools for general repairs such as repairing power cords, changing bits, etc.Ladder
Scaffolding
Aerial work platformFall protection
Hard hat
Safety glasses
Hearing protection
First aid kitThe Takenaka Carpentry Tools Museum, Kobe, Japan
The Debate of the Carpenter’s Tools, Edited by George Shuffelton
Originally Published in Codex Ashmole 61: A Compilation of Popular Middle English Verse
