John Venn, FRS, FSA (4 August 1834 – 4 April 1923) was an English mathematician, logician and philosopher noted for introducing Venn diagrams, which are used in logic, set theory, probability, statistics, and computer science
In 1866, Venn published The Logic of Chance, a ground-breaking book which espoused the frequency theory of probability, arguing that probability should be determined by how often something is forecast to occur as opposed to “educated” assumptions
Venn then further developed George Boole's theories in the 1881 work Symbolic Logic, where he highlighted what would become known as Venn diagrams.
John Venn was born on 4 August 1834 in Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire, to Martha Sykes and Rev
Henry Venn, who was the rector of the parish of Drypool
His mother died when he was three years old
Venn was descended from a long line of church evangelicals, including his grandfather John Venn
Venn was brought up in a very strict atmosphere at home
His father Henry had played a significant part in the Evangelical movement and he was also the secretary of the ‘Society for Missions to Africa and the East’, establishing eight bishoprics overseas
His grandfather was pastor to William Wilberforce of the abolitionist movement, in Clapham.
He began his education in London joining Sir Roger Cholmeley's School, now known as Highgate School, with his brother Henry in September 1846
He moved on to Islington Proprietary School and in October 1853, he went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge
In 1857, he obtained his degree in mathematics and became a fellow
In 1903 he was elected President of the College, a post he held until his death
He followed his family vocation and became an Anglican priest, ordained in 1859, serving first at the church in Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and later in Mortlake, Surrey.
In 1862, he returned to Cambridge as a lecturer in moral science, studying and teaching logic and probability theory, and, beginning around 1869, giving intercollegiate lectures
These duties led to his developing the diagram which would eventually bear his name.
He built rare machines
A certain machine was meant to bowl cricket balls
The machine was so fascinating that when Australian cricketers were visiting Cambridge, the machines were used to entertain their arrival
The bowl cricket ball machine that Venn built actually bowled out the top ranked player of the team four times consecutively.
In 1868, he married Susanna Carnegie Edmonstone with whom he had one son, John Archibald Venn
His son entered the mathematics field as well.
In 1883, he resigned from the clergy, having concluded that Anglicanism was incompatible with his philosophical beliefs
In that same year, Venn was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1884, he was awarded a Sc.D
by Cambridge.
He died on 4 April 1923.
Newspaper archives show that Venn was a very active member of local civic society in Cambridge, and a committee member of the Cambridge Charitable Organisations Society, later elected vice-chairman in December 1884.
Venn was president of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society in 1908–1909
He is also listed as a vice president of the Cambridge Provident Medical Institution.
Venn was a prominent supporter of votes for women
He co-signed with his wife Susanna, a letter to the Cambridge Independent Press published 16 October 1908, encouraging women to put themselves forward as candidates for the up-and-coming Cambridge town council elections
The letter was co-sponsored by Lady Maud Darwin, wife of Sir George Darwin, and Florence Ada Keynes.
The newspaper archives reveal that Venn was also a passionate gardener, regularly taking part in local competitions organised by groups such as the Cambridgeshire Horticultural Society, winning prizes for his roses in July 1885 and for his white carrots later that September.
In 2017 The Drypool Bridge in Hull was decorated with intersecting circles, in honour of Venn.
Venn is commemorated at the University of Hull by the Venn Building.
A stained glass window in the dining hall of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, commemorates Venn's work.
In commemoration of the 180th anniversary of Venn's birth, on 4 August 2014, Google replaced its normal logo on global search pages with an interactive and animated Google doodle that incorporated the use of a Venn diagram.
Venn Street in Clapham, London, which was the home of his grandfather, shows a Venn diagram on the street sign.Venn compiled Alumni Cantabrigienses, a biographical register of former members of the University of Cambridge
His other works include:
A Cambridge Alumni Database
The Venn archives clarify the confusing timeline of the various Venns.
Obituary of John Venn (New York Times)
Portrait of Venn by Charles Brock, and a link to a site about Venn
Another (clearer) view of the Venn stained glass window
John Venn at Find a Grave
