The 1944 United States Senate elections coincided with the re-election of Franklin D
Roosevelt to his fourth term as President
The Democrats retained their large majority, although they lost a net of one seat to the Republicans.
Colored shading indicates party with largest share of that row.
Source: Clerk of the U.S
House of Representatives
Democrats defeated three Republican incumbents:
Connecticut: John A
Danaher, who was replaced by Brien McMahon.
North Dakota: Gerald P
Nye, who was replaced by John Moses.
Pennsylvania: James J
Davis, who was replaced by Francis J
Myers.Republicans defeated one Democratic incumbent:
Iowa: Guy M
Gillette, who was replaced by Bourke B
Hickenlooper.Arkansas: Hattie Wyatt Caraway lost to J
William Fulbright, who won the general election.
Idaho: David Worth Clark lost to Glen H
Taylor, who won the general election.
South Carolina: Ellison D
Smith lost to Olin D
Johnston, who won the general election.Oregon: Rufus C
Holman lost to Wayne Morse, who won the general election.Missouri: Bennett Champ Clark failed to attain renomination and was replaced by Forrest C
Donnell.Republicans took two seats from retiring appointee Democrats:
Indiana: Samuel D
Jackson was replaced by William E
Jenner to complete the remainder of the term ending January 3, 1945, and Homer E
Capehart to serve the next term.
New Jersey: Arthur Walsh was replaced by Howard Alexander Smith
However, Walsh was appointed in place of the deceased Republican William Warren Barbour, meaning the seat's party effectively did not change from the last election.At the beginning of 1944.
Key
D#
Democratic
P#
Progressive
R#
Republican
In these special elections, the winner was seated during 1944 or before January 3, 1945; ordered by election date.
In these general elections, the winners were elected for the term beginning January 3, 1945; ordered by state.
All of the elections involved the Class 3 seats.
Three-term Democrat Carl T
Hayden was easily re-elected.
Hayden would be re-elected three more times before retiring in 1962.
There were 2 elections in Indiana, due to the January 25, 1944 death of Democrat Frederick Van Nuys.
Democrat Samuel D
Jackson was appointed to continue the term, pending a special election
Republican William E
Jenner won the special election to finish the term, and Republican Homer E
Capehart won the general election to the next term.
Republican Henry Cabot Lodge Jr
resigned February 3, 1944 to return to active duty in the U.S
Army during World War II
 Republican Sinclair Weeks was appointed February 8, 1944 to continue the term until an election was held
 A special election was held on November 7, 1944 with Republican Massachusetts Governor Leverett Saltonstall defeating his challengers
 He didn't take office until January 4, 1945, when his term as Governor ended.
The Socialist Labor state convention met on April 2 at the Cornish Arms Hotel, the corner of Eighth Avenue and Twenty-eighth Street, in New York City
They nominated Eric Hass for the U.S
Senate
At that time, the party used the name "Industrial Government Party" on the ballot, but was also referred to as the "Industrial Labor Party".
The Liberal Party was organized by a state convention with about 1,100 delegates who met on May 19 and 20 at the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City
They endorsed the incumbent Democratic U.S
Senator Robert F
Wagner for re-election
The party filed a petition to nominate candidates which was allowed by Secretary of State Curran on August 25.
The Republican State Committee met on August 8 at Albany, New York
They nominated Secretary of State Thomas J
Curran for the U.S
Senate.
The Democratic State Committee met on August 8 at the National Democratic Club at 233, Madison Avenue in New York City
They re-nominated the incumbent U.S
Senator Robert F
Wagner.
The American Labor state convention met on August 10
They endorsed the Democratic nominee Wagner.
The Democratic/American Labor/Liberal ticket was elected and incumbent Wagner was re-elected.
Incumbent Republican Rufus C
Holman ran for re-election, but was defeated in the Republican primary by Wayne Morse.
Incumbent Democratic Senator Elbert D
Thomas won a third term
As of 2022, this is the last time that a Democrat was elected to Utah's class 3 Senate seat.
1944 United States elections
1944 United States presidential election
1944 United States gubernatorial elections
1944 United States House of Representatives elections
78th United States Congress
79th United States Congress
