The Bailiwick of Guernsey has had a number of windmills over the centuries
They were mostly corn mills, and about half of those built survive in one form or another.
Cote des VardesLocated in Montville Road, St Peter Port, used to grind stone, has been converted into a three-storey property.
Delancey WindmillThis mill was standing in 1847.
L'Hyvreuse WindmillThe site of the L'Hyvreuse Windmill is now occupied by the Victoria Tower, built in 1848.
Le Hechet WindmillPhotographed in the 19th century, Le Hechet was located in St Saviour, presumably off Rue du Hechet.
Le Moulin des MontsLe Moulin des Monts, St Sampson's, was destroyed by lightning in 1660
Its site is now occupied by the De Saumarez Memorial in Delancey Park.
Moulin Mont Saint, St SaviourA windmill to grind stone was established in St Saviour in 1833
It is currently under restoration.
Moulin Huet, St MartinMoulin Huet is a tower mill
Possibly named after Walter Huet, Governor of Guernsey in 1372
It was derelict and capless by 1949 when photographed by Donald Muggeridge
The mill had lost its sails by 1926, even though the cap and sail cross remained
The tower is located at the top of Old Mill Road and Les Camps du Moulin, St Martin.
Ozannes WindmillOzannes Mill, in Ruette Braye was in existence in 1897.
Petit Bot WindmillThe windmill, located at the top of Petit Bot Valley was photographed in good condition before it was totally destroyed
Its exact location has not been found
It could be at the top of the St Martin or Forest valleys.
Sausmarez Windmill, St
MartinThe converted mill still stands in Steam Mill Lane, it houses a jewellery business which also operates a store from the converted St
Peter's mill in Jersey.
Vale WindmillA windmill was standing on this site in 1847
Vale Windmill is a five-storey tower mill that was built in 1850
Photographs show it to have had four patent sails mounted in a canister, and an ogee cap similar in shape to those found in Suffolk, winded by a fantail
The mill had a stage at first floor level
It was converted into an artillery observation post by the Germans during the Second World War
This work entailed a three-storey extension being built on the mill tower, making it 21 metres (68 ft 11 in) high overall
The windmill featured on a 2p postage due stamp issued by the Guernsey post office in 1982.
There is a record of a windmill owned by the King before 1242 on The Blaye.
Alderney had a windmill built in 1560.
Sark WindmillSark Windmill was built in 1571 at the seigneur's expense
It is situated on the highest point on Sark (114 metres or 374 feet above sea level), called Le Moulin after the windmill
It is a three-storey tower mill with an ogee cap
In the early 19th century the mill was burned by Sark tenants protesting against the seigneurial system there, but it was later refitted with new machinery and heightened
It was working by wind until 1917 although the sails were removed during World War I
It was used as an observation tower during the German occupation
The mill had four double patent sails, and was winded by a fantail
 The mill featured on the 1971 and 1977 2p coins issued by Guernsey.
Little Sark WindmillLittle Sark Windmill was a tower mill
The tower remains today, mostly covered in ivy.
