Claire Catherine Danes (born April 12, 1979) is an American actress
She is the recipient of three Primetime Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, and two Screen Actors Guild Awards
In 2012, Time named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world, and she was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2015.
Danes gained early recognition as Angela Chase in the 1994 teen drama series My So-Called Life
The role won her a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress and a Primetime Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series
She made her film debut the same year in Little Women (1994)
Her other films include  Home for the Holidays (1995), Romeo + Juliet (1996), The Rainmaker (1997), Les Misérables (1998), Brokedown Palace (1999), the 1999 English dub of Princess Mononoke (1997), The Hours (2002), Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines (2003), Shopgirl (2005), Stardust (2007), and A Kid Like Jake (2018).
From 1998 to 2000, Danes attended Yale University before dropping out to return to acting
She appeared in an Off-Broadway production of The Vagina Monologues in 2000 and made her Broadway debut playing Eliza Doolittle in the 2007 revival of Pygmalion
In 2010, she portrayed Temple Grandin in the highly acclaimed HBO television film Temple Grandin, which won her a second Golden Globe and her first Primetime Emmy Award for the Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie
From 2011 to 2020, she starred as Carrie Mathison in the Showtime drama series Homeland, for which she won two Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, two Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress – Television Series Drama, and the Television Critics Association Award for Individual Achievement in Drama.
Danes was born in Manhattan, New York City, the daughter of sculptor and printmaking artist, Carla Danes (née Hall), and photographer Christopher Danes
Her older brother, Asa, is a lawyer
During Danes's childhood, her mother ran a small toddler day care center called "Danes Tribe" out of the family's SoHo loft and later served as Danes's manager
Danes's father worked as a residential general contractor in New York for 20 years in a company he ran called "Overall Construction"
He also worked as a photographer and computer consultant
Danes is named after her paternal grandmother, Claire Danes (née Tomowske)
Danes is primarily of German and British descent.
The family lived in an artist's loft on Crosby Street
Danes attended P.S
3 and P.S
11 for elementary school and Professional Performing Arts School for junior high school
She attended the New York City Lab School for Collaborative Studies in Manhattan
She attended The Dalton School for one year of high school before moving with her parents to Santa Monica, California, for the role in My So-Called Life
They moved two days after the 1994 Northridge earthquake.
Danes graduated from the Lycée Français de Los Angeles in 1997
In 1998, she began studies at Yale University
After studying for two years as a psychology major, she dropped out to focus on her film career.
Danes started studying dance when she was six years old
She took dance classes from Ellen Robbins at Dance Theater Workshop and acting classes at HB Studio the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute at the age of 10
She appeared in theater and video productions in New York City
Although she continued to dance, Danes said that her focus shifted to acting by the time she was nine years old
Her audition with Miloš Forman when she was 11 led to roles in several student films
She signed with agent Karen Friedman at the Writers & Artists talent agency at age 12.
At age 13, Danes got her first big job working on the Dudley Moore TV sitcom pilot called Dudley, which was shot at Silvercup Studios in Astoria, Queens
Danes played a teenage murderer in a guest starring role on Law & Order in the season three episode "Skin Deep"
She appeared in an episode of HBO's Lifestories: Families in Crisis entitled "The Coming out of Heidi Leiter"
In March 1993, a pilot episode was shot, when she was 13 years old
It would be almost another year and a half before broadcast.
She then starred as the 15-year-old Angela Chase in the television drama series My So-Called Life
For her role, she won a Golden Globe Award and received an Emmy nomination
Despite being canceled after only 19 episodes, My So-Called Life has developed a large cult following
In 1995, she starred in the Soul Asylum music video for "Just Like Anyone".
In 2010, Danes starred in the HBO production of Temple Grandin, a biopic about the autistic animal scientist
She won the 2010 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie, the 2011 Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film and the 2011 Screen Actors Guild Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Television Movie or Miniseries award
The film was well received and Grandin herself praised Danes's performance.
From 2011 to 2020, Danes starred in the Showtime series Homeland, in which she played Carrie Mathison, an agent of the CIA who has bipolar disorder
She won the 2013 Golden Globe and the 2012 Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Television Series for her performance
She also won the 2012 and 2013 Emmy for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for her performance in Homeland
In 2012, Time magazine named Danes one of the 100 most influential people in the world.
On February 10, 2021, it was announced that Danes would helm the Apple drama series The Essex Serpent, replacing Keira Knightley, as Cora Seaborne.
Danes played Beth March in the 1994 film adaptation of Little Women
Although ABC canceled My So-Called Life in 1995, her higher profile led to being cast in several film roles, including 1995's Home for the Holidays and 1996's I Love You, I Love You Not and To Gillian on Her 37th Birthday.
Her first leading role on the big screen came in 1996, when she portrayed Juliet in the film Romeo + Juliet, inspiring director Baz Luhrmann to call her, at age 16, "the Meryl Streep of her generation"
Later that year, it was reported that she turned down the female lead role in Titanic.
In 1997, Danes played abused wife Kelly Riker in The Rainmaker, directed by Francis Ford Coppola, as well as Jenny in Oliver Stone's noir U Turn.
In 1998, she played several very different roles: Cosette in Les Misérables, and the pregnant teenage daughter of Polish immigrants in Polish Wedding.
In 1999, she made her first appearance in an animated feature with the English version of Princess Mononoke
That same year, she played the role of Julie Barnes in the big screen adaptation of the 1970s TV show The Mod Squad
She also starred in Brokedown Palace.
Danes left her career temporarily to attend Yale, having made 13 films in five years
In 2002, she returned to film
She starred in Igby Goes Down
Later that year, she co-starred as Clarissa Vaughan's (played by Meryl Streep) daughter in the Oscar-nominated film The Hours
The following year, she was cast in Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, followed by Stage Beauty in 2004
She earned critical acclaim in 2005 when she starred in Shopgirl and The Family Stone
In 2007, she appeared in the fantasy Stardust, which she described as a "classic model of romantic comedy"
In 2007, she appeared in the drama film Evening and the thriller film The Flock
She was also featured in the 2008 film Me and Orson Welles.
Danes got her start in New York City theater appearing in performances of Happiness, Punk Ballet, and Kids Onstage, for which she choreographed her own dance
In April, 2000, she appeared off Broadway in Eve Ensler's The Vagina Monologues
In November of that same year, she appeared as Emily Webb in a one-night-only staged reading of Thornton Wilder's Our Town at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Beverly Hills
The production was staged by Bess Armstrong, who had played the mother of Danes's character on My So-Called Life.
In September 2005, Danes returned to New York's Performance Space 122, where she had performed as a child
She appeared in choreographer Tamar Rogoff's solo dance piece "Christina Olson: American Model", where she portrayed the subject of Andrew Wyeth's famous painting Christina's World
Olson suffered from muscular deterioration that left her weak and partially paralyzed
Danes was praised for her dance skills and acting in the project.
In January, 2007, Danes performed in Performance Space 122's Edith and Jenny
Later in 2007, Danes made her Broadway theatre debut as Eliza Doolittle in the Roundabout Theatre Company revival of George Bernard Shaw's Pygmalion, directed by David Grindley at the American Airlines Theatre.
In January, 2012, Harvard University's Hasty Pudding Theatricals named Danes their 2012 Woman of the Year.
In March, 2016, Danes performed in Dry Powder by Sarah Burgess at The Public Theater, starring alongside John Krasinski, Hank Azaria and Sanjit De Silva
The play was directed by Thomas Kail.
In 1995, Danes was the main character of Soul Asylum's music video for the song "Just Like Anyone".
In 1997, Danes wrote an introduction to Neil Gaiman's Death: The Time of Your Life.
In 2012, Danes's audiobook recording of Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale was released at Audible.com
 Her performance won the 2013 Audie Award for fiction.
She hosted the 2013 Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo.
In 2015, Danes was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
Danes has been in therapy since the age of six and considers it "a helpful tool and a luxury to self-reflect and get some insight".
In 1998, Danes was declared persona non grata by the Filipino officials
The restriction involved a ban from entering Manila or the Philippines and prohibition on distribution of her films in the region
The ban came after Danes said Manila, the capital of the Philippines, "smelled of cockroaches, with rats all over, and that there is no sewage system, and the people do not have anything – no arms, no legs, no eyes"
Danes later apologized for those remarks, but the Filipino authorities refused to lift the ban.
Danes and her mother are supporters of the charity Afghan Hands, which helps women in Afghanistan gain independence, education, and livable wages
Danes is also a long time supporter of DonorsChoose, a website that allows public school teachers to create project requests.
Danes is a feminist and has been critical of female underrepresentation within Hollywood.
Danes met singer Ben Lee at her eighteenth birthday party in 1997
They dated for six years before separating in 2003.
In 2003, Danes began dating actor Billy Crudup, with whom she starred in Stage Beauty
Their relationship attracted significant media attention, as it led to Crudup's break-up with actor Mary-Louise Parker, who was seven months pregnant with their child at the time
Danes and Crudup's relationship lasted until 2006
Reflecting on their relationship, Danes had commented in 2016, "That was a scary thing
It was really hard
I didn't know how to not do that
I was just in love with him, and needed to explore that, and I was 24 ..
I didn't quite know what those consequences would be
But it's OK
I went through it."
Danes met actor Hugh Dancy on the set of the film Evening in 2006
They announced their engagement in February 2009 and married in France in a private ceremony later that year
They have two sons, born in 2012 and 2018.
The Primetime Emmy Award is American award bestowed by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences in recognition of excellence in U.S
primetime TV programming.
The Golden Globe Awards are accolades bestowed by the 93 members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, recognizing excellence in film and television, both domestic and foreign.
The Screen Actors Guild Award is an accolade given by the Screen Actors Guild‐American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA) to recognize outstanding performances in film and primetime television.
The Critics' Choice Awards—both film and television—are accolades presented by the Broadcast Film Critics Association (BTJA) (US).
The Satellite Awards are annual awards given by the International Press Academy that are commonly noted in entertainment industry journals and blogs.
The People's Choice Awards is an American awards show, recognizing the people and the work of popular culture, voted on by the general public.
Media related to Claire Danes at Wikimedia Commons
Claire Danes at IMDb
Claire Danes at the Internet Broadway Database
Claire Danes at the Internet Off-Broadway Database
