The Eurovision Song Contest 1962 was the 7th edition of the annual Eurovision Song Contest
It took place in Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, following the country's victory at the 1961 contest with the song "Nous les amoureux" by Jean-Claude Pascal
The contest was organised by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) and host broadcaster Compagnie Luxembourgeoise de Télédiffusion (CLT), and was held at the Villa Louvigny on Sunday 18 March 1962 hosted by the Luxembourgish speaker Mireille Delannoy
This remains the last time that the final of the contest has not been held on a Saturday evening, as since 1963 the final of the contest has consistently been held on a Saturday evening.
Sixteen countries participated in the contest – the same that took part the year before.
The winner was France with the song "Un premier amour", performed by Isabelle Aubret, written by Roland Valade and composed by Claude Henri Vic
This was France's third victory in the contest in just five years, having also won in 1958 and 1960
It was also the third consecutive winning song performed in French
For the first time in the contest's history, Austria, Belgium, Netherlands and Spain all scored nul points.
The 1962 Eurovision Song Contest was hosted in Luxembourg City
The venue chosen to host the 1962 contest was the Villa Louvigny
 The building served as the headquarters of Compagnie Luxembourgeoise de Télédiffusion, the forerunner of RTL Group
 It is located in Municipal Park, in the Ville Haute quarter of the centre of the city.
After France's entry had been performed, there was a short power failure rendering the screens dark
There also seemed to be an even shorter power failure during the Netherlands' entry, when viewers around Europe only saw darkness on their television screens when the Netherlands performed
The power failure seemed to affect the Netherlands' score during the voting
Nevertheless, the song turned out to be popular in Europe after the contest.
All countries who participated in the Eurovision Song Contest 1961 also participated in this edition.
Each performance had a conductor who conducted the orchestra.
This year marked the second jury voting system change in the contest's history, moving away from a point per favourite song from 10-member juries to the allocation of 3, 2 and 1 points given to the top three favourite songs from each country's 10-member jurors' ratings.
Below is a summary of all 3 points received:
Listed below is the order in which votes were cast during the 1962 contest along with the spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for their respective country.
Each national broadcaster also sent a commentator to the contest, in order to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language.
Official websiteCoordinates: 49°36′41″N 06°07′21″E﻿ / ﻿49.61139°N 6.12250°E﻿ / 49.61139; 6.12250
