John Henry Poynting FRS (9 September 1852 – 30 March 1914) was an English physicist
He was the first professor of physics at Mason Science College from 1880 to 1900, and then the successor institution, the University of Birmingham until his death.
Poynting was the youngest son of Thomas Elford Poynting, a Unitarian minister
He was born at the parsonage of the Monton Unitarian Chapel in Eccles, Lancashire (his father serving as minister there from 1846 to 1878.) In his boyhood he was educated at the nearby school operated by his father
From 1867 to 1872 he attended Owens College, now the University of Manchester, where his physics teachers included Osborne Reynolds and Balfour Stewart
From 1872 to 1876 he was a student at Cambridge University, where he attained high honours in mathematics after taking grinds with Edward Routh
In the late 1870s he worked in the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge under James Clerk Maxwell
In 1880, he became the first professor of physics at the University of Birmingham.
He was the developer and eponym of the Poynting vector, which describes the direction and magnitude of electromagnetic energy flow and is used in the Poynting theorem, a statement about energy conservation for electric and magnetic fields
This work was first published in 1884
He performed a measurement of Newton's gravitational constant by innovative means during 1893
In 1903 he was the first to realise that the Sun's radiation can draw in small particles towards it: this was later named the Poynting–Robertson effect.
He discovered the torsion-extension coupling in finite strain elasticity
This is now known as the (positive) Poynting effect in torsion.
Poynting and the Nobel prizewinner J
J
Thomson co-authored a multi-volume undergraduate physics textbook, which was in print for about 50 years and was in widespread use during the first third of the 20th century
Poynting wrote most of it.
He was awarded an honorary MSc in Pure Science in 1901 by Birmingham University.
Poynting lived at 11 St Augustine's Road, Edgbaston with his family and servants for some years
 He previously lived at 66 Beaufort Road, Edgbaston (demolished) and died of a diabetic coma, aged 61, at 10 Ampton Road, Edgbaston in 1914
In 1880 he married Maria Adney Cropper
He was survived by his widow, a son, and two daughters.
Alfred J
Lotka was among Poynting's most famous students, being inspired by Poynting to apply the ideas of physical chemistry to biology
Lotka dedicated his classic book on mathematical population biology to Poynting.
Poynting predicted the `Poynting-Robertson effect', whereby a particle of dust orbiting a star experiences a drag force which makes it spiral slowly into the star
 Howard P
Robertson later restated the prediction using General Relativity.
Poynting's name also pertains to the popular student society at the University of Birmingham, 'Poynting Physical Society' or PPS.
Craters on Mars and the Moon are named in his honour, as is the main Physics building at the University of Birmingham and the departmental society there, the Poynting Physical Society.
He is credited with coining the expression "greenhouse effect" in 1909 to explain how infrared-absorbing trace gasses such as carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases the surface temperature of Earth and Mars.
1884 A Comparison of the Fluctuations in the Price of Wheat and in the Cotton and Silk Imports into Great Britain, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society; 47, 1884, pp. 34–64
1894 The Mean Density of the Earth London, C
Griffin
1899 (with J
J
Thomson) A Text-Book of Physics: volume I: Sound London, C
Griffin; 2nd edition, 1900
1902 (with J
J
Thomson) A Text-Book of Physics: volume II: Properties of Matter London, C
Griffin
1904 (with J
J
Thomson) A Text-Book of Physics: volume III: Heat London, C
Griffin
1913 The earth; its shape, size, weight and spin Cambridge University Press
1914 (with J
J
Thomson) A Text-Book of Physics: volume IV: Electricity and Magnetism
Pts
I and II: Static electricity and magnetism London, C
Griffin
1920 Collected Scientific Papers Cambridge University Press Works by or about John Henry Poynting at Wikisource
Quotations related to John Henry Poynting at Wikiquote
Media related to John Henry Poynting at Wikimedia Commons
