Goranboy District (Azerbaijani: Goranboy rayonu) is one of the 66 districts of Azerbaijan
It is located in the west of the country and belongs to the Ganja-Dashkasan Economic Region
The district borders the districts of Kalbajar, Tartar, Yevlakh, Samukh, and Goygol
Its capital and largest city is Goranboy
As of 2020, the district had a population of 105,000.
During the Soviet era, the region was best known for the oil-cure sanatorium resort of Naftalan, though administratively Naftalan counts as an independent city
Naftalan is now starting to operate again following several years of virtual inaction when the resorts were filled with refugees from the First Nagorno-Karabakh War.
The relief of the region in the northeast is lowland, and in the southwest it is mountainous, crossed by gorges.  The terrain allows oil (including medical oil), limestone and clay to be extracted from minerals.
The subtropical dry, mild climate is common in this area
The average temperature ranges from -1 °C in winter to 26.5 °C in summer, with average rainfalls of 300–600 mm
Kura River and its flow are flowing through the region.
The region name is taken from the city of Goranboy which is the administrative centre of the district
This toponym is derived from the word Gerani (the river flowing through the city) and Boyahmedli (former name of the city)
Over time, the particle “Ahmedli” was removed from the city's name.
Goranboy District was established as an administrative district by decree of the Central Executive Committee of the Azerbaijan SSR on 8 August 1930
In the same year, the Armenian-majority Shahumyan District in what is now southern Goranboy was established by Decision 477 of the executive committee
In 1938, the district and its capital were renamed Gasim Ismailov (Qasım İsmayılov, in Russian Kasum-Ismailovski raion) after the Azerbaijani communist of the same name
The district and city were renamed Goranboy in 1991.
In 1991, during the early phases of the Karabakh conflict, together the Soviet leadership in Azerbaijan and Moscow decided to initiate a campaign of resettlement and disarmament under Operation Ring, where the Armenian residents of the region were deported to Soviet Armenia
Operation Ring was also named Operation Chaykend, the name of the prominent Armenian village of Getashen that fell in the eastern district of Khanlar (now Goygol).
Shahumyan District was merged with the Goranboy District in 1992 and has been repopulated by ethnic Azerbaijanis, most of whom are internally displaced persons who were deported from Nagorno-Karabakh and surrounding districts
The former district and is still claimed by the self-proclaimed Republic of Artsakh as part of its Shahumyan Province.
The population of the region is mainly Azerbaijanis as well as a small number of Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians.
There are 30 pre-school children enterprises, 80 secondary schools, 1 technical, secondary and vocational schools in Goranboy region.
Teachers examination in Barda city was held in April 2017, according to the Decree of the Minister of Education of 7 October 2016,  in connection with the execution of the Order No
999 of the President of the Republic dated 16 January 2015
 2433 teachers participated in this examination.
Today, Goranboy belongs to Ganja-Kazakh economic region and main sector here is agriculture
Local folk is growing cotton, vegetables, grain, and viticulture
Furthermore, animal husbandry is also pretty common in this area
In Soviet Union times, 21 collective farms and 4 state farms were located in this region.
The institutions operating in the region as “Goran Pambig” a cotton processing company”, Goranboy-Wine” a wine-producing enterprise”, "Turk Yapı Senaye” construction company, “Gilan holding” construction company and others have a strong impact on the economy of the region and the country.
Also, the Baku-Qazakh highway, the Baku-Tbilisi railway, the Karadag-Agstafa-Tbilisi gas pipeline pass through the district.
Khankarvend village mosque located Goranboy region was built in 2007 by local residents.
Khudu baba Mausoleum is located in the Safikurd village of Goranboy.
Gulustan FortressAdministrative divisions of Azerbaijan
State Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan Republic
Population of AzerbaijanCoordinates: 40°36′27″N 46°47′33″E﻿ / ﻿40.607621°N 46.792619°E﻿ / 40.607621; 46.792619
