Rūpa (Devanagari: रूप) means "form"
As it relates to any kind of basic object, it has more specific meanings in the context of Indic religions.
According to the Monier-Williams Dictionary (2006), rūpa is defined as:
..
any outward appearance or phenomenon or colour (often pl.) , form , shape , figure RV
&c &c ...
to assume a form ; often ifc
= " having the form or appearance or colour of " , " formed or composed of " , " consisting of " , " like to " ....In Hinduism, many compound words are made using rūpa  to describe subtle and spiritual realities such as the svarupa, meaning the form of the self
 It may be used to express matter or material phenomena, especially that linked to the power of vision in samkhya, In the Bhagavad Gita, the Vishvarupa form, an esoteric conception of the Absolute is described.
Overall, rūpa is the Buddhist concept of material form, including both the body and external matter.
More specifically, in the Pali Canon, rūpa is contextualized in three significant frameworks:
rūpa-khandha – "material forms," one of the five aggregates (khandha) by which all phenomena can be categorized (see Fig
1).
rūpa-āyatana – "visible objects," the external sense objects of the eye, one of the six external sense bases (āyatana) by which the world is known (see Fig
2).
nāma-rūpa – "name and form" or "mind and body," which in the causal chain of dependent origination (paticca-samuppāda) arises from consciousness and leads to the arising of the sense bases.In addition, more generally, rūpa is used to describe a statue, in which it is sometimes called Buddharupa.
In Buddhism, Rūpa is one of Skandha, it perceived by colors and images.
According to the Yogacara school, rūpa is not matter as in the metaphysical substance of materialism
Instead it means both materiality and sensibility—signifying, for example, a tactile object both insofar as that object is made of matter and that the object can be tactically sensed
In fact rūpa is more essentially defined by its amenability to being sensed than its being matter: just like everything else it is defined in terms of its function; what it does, not what it is
As matter, rūpa is traditionally analysed in two ways: as four primary elements (Pali, mahābhūta); and, as ten or twenty-four secondary or derived elements.
Existing rūpa consists in the four primary or underived (no-upādā) elements:
earth or solidity
fire or heat
water or cohesion
air or movementIn the Abhidhamma Pitaka and later Pali literature, rūpa is further analyzed in terms of ten or twenty-three or twenty-four types of secondary or derived (upādā) matter
In the list of ten types of secondary matter, the following are identified:
eye
ear
nose
tongue
body
form
sound
odour
taste
touchIf twenty-four secondary types are enumerated, then the following fifteen are added to the first nine of the above ten:
femininity
masculinity or virility
life or vitality
heart or heart-basis
physical indications (movements that indicate intentions)
vocal indications
space element
physical lightness or buoyancy
physical yieldingness or plasticity
physical handiness or wieldiness
physical grouping or integration
physical extension or maintenance
physical aging or decay
physical impermanence
foodA list of 23 derived types can be found, for instance, in the Abhidhamma Pitaka's Dhammasangani (e.g., Dhs
596), which omits the list of 24 derived types' "heart-basis."
The practice of dhyana is aided by anapanasati, mindfulness of breathing
The Suttapitaka (the Agamas) describe four stages of rupa jhāna
Rupa refers to the material realm, in a neutral stance, as different from the kama realm (lust, desire) and the arupa-realm (non-material realm)
Each jhāna is characterised by a set of qualities which are present in that jhana.
First dhyāna: the first dhyana can be entered when one is secluded from sensuality and unskillful qualities, due to withdrawal and right effort
There is pīti ("rapture") and non-sensual sukha ("pleasure") as the result of seclusion, while vitarka-vicara ("discursive thought") continues;
Second dhyana: there is pīti ("rapture") and non-sensual sukha ("pleasure") as the result of concentration (samadhi-ji, "born of samadhi"); ekaggata (unification of awareness) free from vitarka-vicara ("discursive thought"); sampasadana ("inner tranquility");
Third dhyana: upekkhā (equanimous; "affective detachment"), mindful, and alert, and senses pleasure with the body;
Fourth dhyana: upekkhāsatipārisuddhi  (purity of equanimity and mindfulness); neither-pleasure-nor-pain
Traditionally, the fourth jhāna is seen as the beginning of attaining psychic powers (abhijñā).Buddhaghosa, Bhadantācariya (trans
from Pāli by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli) (1999)
The Path of Purification: Visuddhimagga
Seattle, WA: BPS Pariyatti Editions
ISBN 1-928706-00-2.
Hamilton, Sue (2001)
Identity and Experience: The Constitution of the Human Being according to Early Buddhism
Oxford: Luzac Oriental
ISBN 1-898942-23-4.
Monier-Williams, Monier (1899, 1964)
A Sanskrit-English Dictionary
London: Oxford University Press
 ISBN 0-19-864308-X
 Retrieved 2008-03-06 from "Cologne University" at http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-koeln.de/scans/MWScan/index.php?sfx=pdf.
Rhys Davids, Caroline A.F
([1900], 2003)
Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics, of the Fourth Century B.C., Being a Translation, now made for the First Time, from the Original Pāli, of the First Book of the Abhidhamma-Piṭaka, entitled Dhamma-Saṅgaṇi (Compendium of States or Phenomena)
Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing
ISBN 0-7661-4702-9.Thanissaro Bhikkhu (trans.) (2003)
Maha-hatthipadopama Sutta: The Great Elephant Footprint Simile (MN 28)
Retrieved 2008-03-06 from "Access to Insight" at [1].
