Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
The already historic Powerball jackpot climbed to an estimated $1.55 billion after there was no big winner in Saturday night’s drawing, leaving the third largest prize in the game’s history still up for grabs.
If the jackpot is won in the next drawing on Monday, a lucky player would have the option to claim a $679.8 million cash prize before tax, according to Powerball’s website.
The jackpot rolled for a 34th time Saturday, with no winners for the $1.4 billion jackpot
The prize would have been the fifth largest US lottery jackpot.
There have been no grand prize winners since July 19, when a single ticket sold in California nabbed a jackpot worth $1.08 billion.
The Powerball jackpot is huge, but here are 3 better ways to increase your wealth
While no ticket matched all six numbers to claim the big prize Saturday, there were still some big winners.
Multiple tickets matched five numbers to win $1 million prizes in California, Kansas, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Ohio, Texas and Wisconsin
Another two tickets, sold in Iowa and Maine, nabbed $2 million prizes each because their holders activated a “power play” multiplier, Powerball said.
The jackpot crossed the billion-dollar mark on September 30, marking the first time in Powerball history that back-to-back jackpot cycles have generated billion-dollar grand prizes, according to Powerball.
Overall, your odds of winning a Powerball prize of any amount are 1 in 24.9, the lottery says
But the chances of winning a grand prize are exceedingly slim at 1 in 292.2 million.
The largest ever Powerball Jackpot was a $2.04 billion prize won November 2022 in California, followed by a $1.586 billion jackpot won in January 2016.
CNN’s Zoe Sottile and Nouran Salahieh contributed to this report.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS
US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes
All times are ET
Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc
All rights reserved
Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc
and its licensors
All rights reserved
Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN
Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC
All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates
Fair value provided by IndexArb.com
Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network
A Warner Bros
Discovery Company
All Rights Reserved
 CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
