Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Lottery players have the chance to win big tonight, with the Powerball jackpot soaring to an estimated $1.4 billion for Saturday’s drawing after there was no grand prize winner Wednesday.
The winning numbers are 47, 54, 57, 60, 65 and the Powerball 19.
The jackpot will bear out a cash value of around $614.0 million, according to the Powerball website
Winners can choose to either receive their prize in one lump-sum payment or in 30 graduated payments over 29 years.
If a lucky player takes home the grand prize, they would be the winner of the third largest jackpot in the game’s history
The prize up for grabs Saturday would also be the fifth largest US lottery jackpot, Powerball says.
The Powerball jackpot is huge, but here are 3 better ways to increase your wealth
But players shouldn’t get their hopes too high: The chances of winning the jackpot are just 1 in 292,201,338.00, according to Powerball
The drawing will be streamed live at 10:59 p.m
ET on Saturday.
Powerball has had no grand prize winner since July 19, when a single ticket sold in California won a jackpot worth $1.08 billion.
Wednesday’s Powerball drawing was the 33rd consecutive with no jackpot winner
The numbers were 9, 35, 54, 63, 64 and Powerball 1.
The largest Powerball jackpot ever was a $2.04 billion prize, won by a lucky sole ticket in November 2022.
CNN’s Nouran Salahieh contributed to this report.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS
US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes
All times are ET
Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc
All rights reserved
Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc
and its licensors
All rights reserved
Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN
Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC
All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates
Fair value provided by IndexArb.com
Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network
A Warner Bros
Discovery Company
All Rights Reserved
 CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
