Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
The Girl Scouts are discontinuing a popular cookie just a year after its debut sparked a frenzy.
Raspberry Rally won’t be sold this upcoming cookie-sales season, which runs January to April 2024, Girl Scouts of the USA has announced
 The Rallies was introduced last year as a “sister” cookie to the iconic Thin Mints, a crisp mint-flavored cookie encased in chocolate, but in the Raspberry Rally, the cookie was replaced with a bright pink berry-flavored one
It was dipped in the same chocolate coating as its sibling.
The Rallies were the Girl Scouts’ first-ever cookie to be exclusively sold online, a strategy aimed at “enhancing girls’ e-commerce sales and entrepreneurial skills,” the organization announced last year.
But demand created an online shopping spree with some chapters reporting they sold out of the $5 boxes in less than a day
Resellers offered the Rallies on eBay for as much as $30 per box
The organization didn’t disclose how many boxes they produced.
“While Raspberry Rally was extremely popular last year, we are taking a pause this season to prioritize supplying our classic varieties,” the Girl Scouts of the USA said in a statement to CNN.
This year, not even Girl Scout cookies are immune from inflation: Some chapters have announced that they will sell for $6 per box this upcoming coming cookie season -— an increase of a $1 on some varieties from last year.
Girl Scout cookies are coming back, and prices are going up
Some cookies, like S’mores and Toffee-Tastic, were already priced at $6
But now the higher price will apply to other cookies that the troops sell, including the more classic varieties
Troops across the country announced price increase from $4 to $5 a box in 2014 and 2015.
An explanation sent from the Girl Scouts Heart of the Hudson to troop parents said the price hike was to “combat rising production and material costs.”
Consumers have been tightening their wallets when it comes to discretionary items, and some may balk at the higher prices.
But Girl Scouts learned last year that there is a market for higher-priced cookies, thanks to the Raspberry Rally debacle
The Rallies changed hands several times higher than their listed price, to the likely frustration of the Girl Scouts leadership.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS
US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes
All times are ET
Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc
All rights reserved
Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc
and its licensors
All rights reserved
Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN
Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC
All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates
Fair value provided by IndexArb.com
Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network
A Warner Bros
Discovery Company
All Rights Reserved
 CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
