Markets
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Women have made huge strides in business, ascending to the C-suite and the boardroom in record numbers.
But they are still very far from achieving parity with men in securing top corporate jobs in the United States.
Women make up half the US population
But they only account for 10.6% of Fortune 500 chief executives, 30.4% of US board members and 32.8% of college and university presidents, according to the Pew Research Center.
Pew decided to ask Americans why they think that is and whether they expect more women to occupy top business roles anytime soon
So they surveyed a nationally representative sampling of US adults.
In response to the question, “Why aren’t there more women in top executive business positions?” respondents identified several “major” reasons.
Top among them:
When asked whether there will ever be as many women as men in top executive positions in the business world, 50% said men will continue to outnumber women
Another 48% said it’s “only a matter of time” before there are as many women as men occupying the top roles.
Pew compared responses from men and women, and from respondents identifying as Democrats or Republicans.
Most women (65%) and most Democrats, regardless of gender, (76%) said there are too few women in business leadership
Among all those who said this, a large majority (79%) said ideally there should be the same number of women and men in these roles
Another 10% said more women than men would be ideal, and another 10% said it would be ideal to have more women but still not as many women as men.
Between the major political parties, Democrats were more likely than Republicans to see multiple factors as major obstacles for women seeking top leadership positions in business.
But gender overrode political affiliation when it came to citing views on why more women aren’t at the top in the business world.
“Republican and Democratic women are more likely than their male counterparts to say there are too few women in top business leadership positions and to point to certain factors as major obstacles for women,” Pew said.
(Here is a look at all the survey questions and responses.)
Most stock quote data provided by BATS
US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes
All times are ET
Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc
All rights reserved
Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc
and its licensors
All rights reserved
Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN
Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC
All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates
Fair value provided by IndexArb.com
Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2023 Cable News Network
A Warner Bros
Discovery Company
All Rights Reserved
 CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
